As a Sikh, Vishavjit Singh has found himself wrestling with the subject these past few days. “If this had happened at a mosque, would our reaction be different?” asked Mr. Singh, a software engineer in suburban New York who also publishes political cartoons online at Sikhtoons.com. “I hope not, but the answer might be yes. You’d have the same amount of coverage, but you might have more voices saying, ‘Well, you know, it’s understandable, we’re at war, we’ve been at war.’ That’s an unfortunate commentary on our society today.”

The paradox is that bias crimes against Muslims are growing a decade after the Sept. 11 attacks. The number of such instances, as tallied by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, had been falling steadily from nearly 500 in 2001 to 107 in 2009. Then, in 2010, the most recent year for which the F.B.I. has data, the number leapt by 50 percent, to 160.

That spike does not look like either a mathematical or historical accident. During 2010, controversy erupted about the proposed “ground zero mosque,” which was actually a community center several blocks away. Prompted by several actual or attempted acts of terrorism by American Muslims, Representative Peter T. King began preparing for hearings in the spring of 2011 on supposedly widespread subversion among millions of American Muslims — an exercise in suspicion, if not guilt, by association.

While those public pageants have largely subsided, there remain well-endowed groups like Jihad Watch, ACT for America and Stop Islamization of America. Several states have passed statutes outlawing the application of Shariah, and thus lending credence to the canard that American Muslims seek to impose their religious law. Representative Michele Bachmann, a former candidate for the Republican presidential nomination, recently accused a Muslim aide to Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton of having ties to the Muslim Brotherhood.

Such talk adds up to what John Shuford, the director of the Institute for Hate Studies at Gonzaga University in Spokane, Wash., calls “enmification” — the process of turning a particular group into an enemy. Now that American Muslims have been enmified, violence against them is understood in a mitigated, mediated way.

Photo

“Rationalization (or the capability of being rationalized) is a good way of putting it,” Professor Shuford wrote in an e-mail message. “Not in the sense of rational behavior or excusability, but in the sense of being understandable, in the way that sometimes leaps in logic, mistaken or misinformed beliefs, outright ignorance and prejudice, and influential social narratives can be quite intelligible even to those who do not view the world in the same way.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Just one day after the shootings near Milwaukee, a mosque in Joplin, Mo., was burned down. Several weeks earlier, it had also been set afire. This latest episode was covered mostly by the local news media and The Associated Press, with a few larger organizations picking up the wire-service story.

Certainly, an apparent bias crime against property, heinous as that is, does not compare in journalism’s calculus to the bigoted murder of six people. But it is at least worth pondering whether the Joplin arson also set off a kind of internal well-you-must-understand response.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times. You may opt-out at any time. You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“If it were a church or a synagogue that had been burned down twice, we’d be shocked by it,” Mr. Aslan said. “The narrative about the mosque burning has a sense of expectation to it.”

The problem with enmification, though, is that it knows few bounds. What started with the hatred of Muslims has repeatedly swept up Sikhs (and also, in some cases, Latinos) in its vortex.

“For the Sikh community, it doesn’t matter that it was mistaken for being Muslim,” said Eric Ward, an expert in hate crimes who was formerly with an interfaith coalition called the Center for New Community. “What matters is that individuals should not be targeted for their faith.”