







window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-5', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 5', target_type: 'mix' });









window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-10', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 10', target_type: 'mix' });









window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-15', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 15', target_type: 'mix' });









window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-20', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 20', target_type: 'mix' });





window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-22', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 22', target_type: 'mix' });

































Photo: Michael Paulsen / Houston Chronicle Image 1 of / 23 Caption Close Image 2 of 23 How about being ranked as overall one of the best cities by Business Week and Bloomberg? Yup, Houston made that list thanks to the local food scene, sports teams and parks. How about being ranked as overall one of the best cities by Business Week and Bloomberg? Yup, Houston made that list thanks to the local food scene, sports teams and parks. Image 3 of 23 Forbes called the Lower Westheimer area the 20th hottest hipster spot in the nation. Forbes called the Lower Westheimer area the 20th hottest hipster spot in the nation. Image 4 of 23 Houston was No. 9 for major metro college students in the American Institute for Economic Research study. Houston was No. 9 for major metro college students in the American Institute for Economic Research study. Image 5 of 23 Image 6 of 23 Houston made Forbes' top U.S. cities for jobs list in terms of employment numbers. Houston made Forbes' top U.S. cities for jobs list in terms of employment numbers. Image 7 of 23 IAH Houston came in as one of the worst airports in the U.S. in a Travel + Leisure list. IAH Houston came in as one of the worst airports in the U.S. in a Travel + Leisure list. Image 8 of 23 Houston was ranked as the sixth most miserable sports city by Forbes. Well, at least the Texans are good. Houston was ranked as the sixth most miserable sports city by Forbes. Well, at least the Texans are good. Image 9 of 23 Having the Galleria certainly helped Houston to be named the top shopping city in America by Forbes. Having the Galleria certainly helped Houston to be named the top shopping city in America by Forbes. Image 10 of 23 Image 11 of 23 Houston knows how to keep its young professionals happy. Houston came in at No.20 according to this list from CareerBliss. Houston knows how to keep its young professionals happy. Houston came in at No.20 according to this list from CareerBliss. Image 12 of 23 The American Planning Association named Buffalo Bayou one of the nation's 10 "great public spaces." The American Planning Association named Buffalo Bayou one of the nation's 10 "great public spaces." Image 13 of 23 The beautiful Hermann Park made this top 10 parks list from Homes.com. The beautiful Hermann Park made this top 10 parks list from Homes.com. Image 14 of 23 Houston was No. 1 for manufacturing jobs according to Forbes. Houston was No. 1 for manufacturing jobs according to Forbes. Image 15 of 23 Image 16 of 23 We have one of the best children’s museums in the country according to Forbes. We have one of the best children’s museums in the country according to Forbes. Image 17 of 23 Ranking top Houston companies by market value, it is no surprise ConocoPhillips fared well. Ranking top Houston companies by market value, it is no surprise ConocoPhillips fared well. Image 18 of 23 We aren't talking about weather here, but Houston topped a Forbes' list as America's coolest city. We aren't talking about weather here, but Houston topped a Forbes' list as America's coolest city. Image 19 of 23 Houston ranked No. 2 for job outlook according to Forbes. Houston ranked No. 2 for job outlook according to Forbes. Image 20 of 23 Image 21 of 23 The Street named Houston one of the cities that were poised for greatness in 2012. The Street named Houston one of the cities that were poised for greatness in 2012. Image 22 of 23 Houston takes home some of the biggest paychecks in the country says Forbes. Houston takes home some of the biggest paychecks in the country says Forbes. Image 23 of 23 Should Houston be kept a secret? 1 / 23 Back to Gallery

“KEEP HOUSTON SECRET”

Like everyone else in Houston, each time I see my city on a new list about how awesome we are, how great our restaurants are, or even how everyone in the country is running over their own grandmother to move here, I get excited. It’s fun to see Houston on any list that doesn’t involve the incredible edible Astros, our humidity, or any number of awful things, like murder, rape, or ungodly traffic.

(Speaking of Houston being awesome, these NSFW shirts are becoming ubiquitous inside the Inner Loop, though I doubt I can wear one here at the Chron offices.)

And my oh my oh is Houston now on tons of lists. It seems some people’s sole enterprise is making lists, either downing or celebrating various American cities. Kinda waiting for a list of cities with the most appearances on lists. Surely Houston will make a good showing.

So far from these lists we know that Houston is really good at moving scams, nurturing business of all sizes, changing business norms, having a healthy housing market, raising rent, creating jobs (lots of manufacturing jobs actually), growing real fast, being mobile-shopping savvy, and generally being “cool” or whatever passes for cool at Forbes magazine. The business mag put us at the top of their cool kids list, and poor ol’ Austin came in at 19 on the Top 20 list. Fort Worth, San Antonio, and Dallas made it on the list at 13, 11, and fourth respectively.

Forbes used things like our massive number of restaurants (11,196 and climbing), median age (33), and 6.9 percent unemployment rate to get us to the top of the list, though the conspiracy nut in me wants to think it was a week of free meals, hotel rooms at the ZaZa, and a Galleria shopping spree to seal that deal.

Forbes, not one to spoil a good time, throws a picture of the mock space shuttle we got instead of the real ones that everyone else in the country got to represent us. Bonus points for having the Hilton where Clara Harris ran over her husband in the background of the shot.

Buuuurn.

Heck, now even The Dallas Morning News is looking down 45 at us in near-approval, though Houstonians will still curse the Big D’s name with impunity at every chance.

But with the praise and accolades, lots of Houstonians are fearful that the Bayou City will become a boomtown cesspool of out-of-towners clogging our roadways, gyms, eateries, apartment complexes, and bars with their non-Texan ways. Pronouncing Houston “how-stun” and Humble like this.

There even seems to be a slight difference of opinion in how to even properly abbreviate Houston, with homers saying that it is and always shall be HOU, and others gunning for HTX, though some snarl that that is too close to Austin’s ATX designation. HTX is for “newstonians” according to the Houstorian Twitter feed, an authority on all things regarding Houston history that isn’t the Chron’s own Bayou City History blog.

And I won’t even go into all the nicknames that abound. Bayou City, Clutch City, Space City, the Bayou City, H-Town, Screwston, City Of Syrup, The Armpit, and a few others that involve curse words not welcome at a family paper.

Many people are wishing that the national media would just shut up about us already, lest we become something that we don’t want to be. But why keep Houston a secret? Why stifle the love?

“Easy, just look at Austin, ” says Jay Rascoe, one of Houston’s biggest champions of tacos and beer, with a handful of beer festivals under his belt that he has planned with his wife Cathy. He points to Austin’s expansion into a yuppie resort city, a convention mecca, and generally where dreams go to die painful corporate deaths as reasons why we should keep HOU hid.

“If you look at areas like Garden Oaks and the Heights, a lot of old mom-and-pops are closing down and selling their lots for big bucks to developers,” says Rascoe. “Gentrification comes with a price — the loss of a city’s identity and character.”

Rascoe adds that the creature comforts of the suburbs are entrenching into Houston’s Inner Loop. Plus, it’s not downtown H-Town that is being sold by these lists, it’s really the ‘burbs — because many newbies can’t tell where Houston begins and ends.

“I’m not saying these changes are all bad. Crime has dropped big time.” he says. “Fifteen years or so ago, we had to leave our car doors unlocked so burglars wouldn’t bust out your windows to snatch your stereo.”

Don’t get the Texican started on bike thefts inside the Loop. I will write a blog on that once my next bicycle gets stolen, which I am sure will happen eventually.

Many are amused by those that do not even live in Houston proper — existing on the sidelines — who would try to take credit for the hard work done by Houston’s creative class which in part helped put Houston on the map this past year.

Local musician Craig Kinsey, of eternal Sideshow Tramps fame, is torn on Houston getting a close-up.

“Many talented artists, chefs, musicians, dancers, and good business people can profit from the attention,” Kinsey says, before reminding us about the inherent downside to things going above ground.

“All that is good will slowly turn lame. Right now we enjoy the rich fruit of a family farm. Bring in national or worldwide attention and you will see the “Monsantofication” of all we partake in here,” Kinsey adds.

Food for thought. Delicious, locally-sourced food for thought. With a pint of 8th Wonder on the side.

Audio engineer Josh Webster has another take on the new influx of baby Houstonites.

“I think people who are willing to leave their homes in another city to move to a strange place with a notorious climate, for more opportunities are the kind of people we should want to be our neighbors,” said Webster.

What Webster says not only touches on the hearty stock of (most) us Houstonians, but also harkens back to the first Americans who decided to give Texas and Houston itself a chance.

And then again, both Texas and Houston have a funny way of weeding out invasive species that aren’t fit for these parts.

Like Carlos Mencia, trying to open up a Tex-Mex place on our turf without the proper credentials.