Donald J. Trump will take the oath of office as the 45th president of the United States on Jan. 20. Here's a closer look at Trump Inauguration Day 2017, the events surrounding the inaugural, the performers and the full schedule in Washington, D.C.

What is the presidential inauguration?

Every four years, the president is sworn into office by the Chief Justice of the United States. The oath of office is followed by a parade down Pennsylvania Avenue and past the White House, and the day concludes with a series of inaugural balls.

When is inauguration day for Donald Trump?

The president-elect officially will take the oath of office at noon Jan. 20 at the west front terrace of the U.S. Capitol. The date and the oath of office are prescribed in the Constitution.

Who is performing at Trump's inauguration?

Just as the Republican National Convention that nominated Trump lacked the big-name politicians and celebrities of earlier gatherings, there so far has been a dearth of well-known entertainers willing to perform at the inauguration. Confirmed are the Radio City Rockettes, Mormon Tabernacle Choir, and singer Jackie Evancho of "America's Got Talent."

How do I get tickets for the inauguration?

Members of Congress get tickets to the swearing-in ceremony that they make available to their constituents. Several members of the New Jersey congressional delegation plan to hold lotteries to award the tickets.

Tickets for the parade, balls and other events are available through the Presidential Inaugural Committee at https://www.58pic2017.org. Special perks are available for big donors to the committee.

What is the inaugural schedule?

The festivities get underway one day earlier, Jan. 19, with a welcome celebration at the Lincoln Memorial and a wreath laying at Arlington National Cemetery. Several state societies, including New Jersey, have their own preinaugural balls.

The president-elect traditionally begins Inauguration Day by attending church before being accompanied by the outgoing president to the Capitol. The vice president, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, will be sworn in first, followed by Trump, who will deliver an inaugural address. That is followed by a luncheon at the Capitol with members of Congress. The inaugural parade comes next. The official inaugural balls take place that evening. On Jan. 21, an interfaith prayer service will take place at the Washington National Cathedral.



Who will attend the inaugural balls?

Trump and Pence and their wives will stop by the gatherings, which usually are populated with supporters of the new president. Two official balls are scheduled, plus one to honor the U.S. armed forces and first responders.