Just two years after it was treading water as a fading startup called dotCloud, open-source darling Docker is soaring. The company announced Tues. it had raised a $95 million Series D funding that should value the company at about $1 billion, making it the latest in a wave of private tech companies to join the billion-dollar ranks.

The funding comes just half a year after Docker had raised its last funding and was led by a previously minor investor in the startup, Insight Venture Partners, alongside new investors Coatue, Goldman Sachs and Northern Trust . A who's-who of venture firms already backing Docker re-upped in the round: Benchmark, Greylock Partners, Sequoia Capital, Trinity Ventures and Jerry Yang's AME Cloud Ventures. While Docker didn't disclose its valuation from the round, sources with knowledge peg the company's pre-money valuation at just under $1 billion. PitchBook pegs the post-money valuation at $1.07 billion.

Just 22 people in Jan. 2014, Docker now has more than 120, scrambling to meet the demand of the developer community for its flagship containers, virtual wrappers that package an application's code and make it easy to break up an app into pieces that can be quickly upgraded, approved and swapped out. The open-source version of the Docker product has been downloaded more than 300 million times, representing more than 1,000% growth; more than 33,000 GitHub projects have Docker in the title alone.

"We've seen unprecedented growth and momentum in all aspects of our business," says CEO Ben Golub . "We want to have all the resources we need to take advantage of it, especially with all the mainstream enterprises jumping into Docker."

Despite its short lifespan, Docker does have powerful friends in the enterprise. The company has made high profile partnerships with the big players like Amazon Web Services, IBM , Microsoft and VMware. The company has the highest buying intention score of any enterprise company or open-source project in six years of tracking by research firm Enterprise Technology Research. And existing customers include Gilt, Goldman Sachs, Spotify and Yelp.

Goldman Sachs and Northern Trust, two of the investors joining this funding round, are actually users of Docker containers whose interest started in their IT departments, Golub says. By having Insight lead the round and Coatue join in, Docker's also signalling it's moving into the growth stage of companies typically much older than two years.

The reason for the quick successive funding is that while Docker sees massive opportunity ahead of it, the company's in a critical phase of adolescence. It's only been offering a hosted site for work organizations to share projects, Docker Hub, since last June, and it announced the beta of its big-company paid offering, Docker Hub Enterprise, in Dec., with 15 large companies testing so far.

The vast majority of Docker users don't, and won't pay for their usage. They fall under the purview of founder and former CEO Solomon Hykes, who as CTO oversees the open-source, free Docker Project. So when it comes to making real money from big customers, Docker's still new to the game. That means investors are offering money as fast as the company will take it to build out a sales team and keep its product on schedule. The company raised its Series C before it had spent the money from its Series A, and is only halfway through the money from its Series B while it raised the current round.

"People are racing to get behind the opportunity here because they see a wide open market that's rethinking the entire data center," says investor Jerry Chen of Greylock. "This will be a multi-billion dollar company and they need this money to reach their full potential. Investors are saying, 'Hey there's a huge opportunity in front of you, don't be afraid to be aggressive.'"

Docker's in a race with a whole wave of sometime-partner startups in the cloud space, many of them also open-sourced. Golub says the company's committed to supporting and building that ecosystem out, with apps helping people work "into the thousands."

"Right now the watchword is to give flexibility," Golub says. But Docker still aspires to be the biggest of the bunch. Vmware, the virtual machine company, trades at a market cap north of $35 billion today. "We have the potential to build one of the most significant companies of the decade," Golub adds. "But we have a lot of hard work to do to get there, for a two-year-old company with 120 people and a pet turtle."