There are few semi-academic lines more famous than, “There are lies, damned lies, and statistics.” It is certainly true that statistics give a sheen of legitimacy to claims that often make it easier to mislead people. This seems to be especially true of economic statistics. This column will review some of the most common ways people use economic statistics to mislead people and falsely support weak or incorrect arguments. Hopefully, this will make it easier for you to spot such bad use of economic statistics and learn how to defeat arguments based on such economic falsehoods and distortions.

The first category of lies with economic statistics is based on a failure to adjust for some non-constant variable crucial to the statistic being used to make your point.

A great example is the focus on stagnation in median household income. That “fact” is created by a number of factors, including poor calculation of the income in question and use of the wrong inflation measure but even if calculated correctly, median household income is misleading because the average household size has been shrinking. In fact, hours worked per household declined 5% from 2004 to 2014. In turns out to be much harder for a household to earn more money when it works fewer hours. The idea that the income of a median family has stalled is based significantly not on hourly pay, but on the fact that fewer hours are being worked, mostly because there are fewer workers in the average household. That changes the story, and likely policy responses, completely.

Additional examples in this category include all the stories about falling labor force participation rates (and similar statistics) that don’t adjust for the growing percent of retirees in the population. The labor force participation rate measures the percent of Americans 16 or older who are working or actively searching for a job. As life expectancy rises and the U.S. population contains a higher and higher share of retirees, the labor force participation is bound to decline since retirees by definition are not participating in the labor force. Basing policy decisions on such an economic statistic without adjusting for the increasing presence of retirees in the population could lead to serious policy missteps.

The second category of misleading economic statistics are lies based on comparisons across unequal groups or the wrong population.

The most famous example in this category is the famous disconnect between productivity and wages, often seen in the chart linked here and even referenced by politicians as famous as Senator Elizabeth Warren (D-MA). The chart shows productivity rising much faster than wages, making viewers think workers are being unfairly underpaid by evil employers. Yet it is all a lie because it compares the average productivity of all workers in the economy to the median wage of production and nonsupervisory employees. First, averages are pulled up by high values in the population being measured while medians are not, so they should not be compared to each other. Worse, the productivity measure in the chart is for all workers while the median wage is only for some workers. Missing from wages are people like software engineers and other high productivity workers who have done much over the past forty years to increase productivity. There is no reason at all why the pay of one group of workers should track with the productivity of a larger, more productive group.

A similar apples to oranges common comparison is made when average worker pay is compared to CEO pay. There is nothing inherently wrong with such a comparison, but those making it to advance their agenda of fighting economic inequality typically present a ratio of pay for “average” workers to the earnings of CEOs of only the largest corporations in the country (say, the top 100 or 500 firms). In reality, as documented by Mark J. Perry and Michael Saltsman in the Wall Street Journal, if all CEOs are included, the average CEO is only paid about $180,000. That is still a nice paycheck, but far from the multimillions pulled in by the top few CEOs.

A third category of lies built on economic statistics involves insufficient control for other factors that have influence on the relationship being claimed. These can range from small fibs because perfect control is difficult to huge whoppers when no attempt is made to correct for other factors well known to be important.

A classic example of such lies are minimum wage studies that don’t account for other trends. For example, some studies have claimed raising the minimum wage increases does not reduce jobs because in cities or states that have raised the minimum wage, jobs in affected industries have still risen. What such studies often fail to account for is the preexisting trends in jobs. If a city that raises its minimum wage was adding 50,000 jobs per year in low-wage occupations before the wage hike and adds only 20,000 such jobs in the year after, that is evidence of lost jobs, not that minimum wage hikes cause no damage.

Similar examples of insufficient controls are found in the gender wage gap statistics that don’t account for differences in experience, education, and other similar factors that directly influence salary levels. The famous statistic of women earning $0.77 for every dollar men earn is exactly this sort of lie. It makes no attempt to correct for differences in experience, education, or even full versus part time status. Louis Jacobson of Politifact does a very nice job of walking a reader through different ways controls can be added that change that number, while also pointing out it can be a true statement as long as it doesn’t come with an implication this difference is due to discrimination against women working equivalent jobs.

A fourth category of lies with economic statistics comes from cherry picking what to count. For example, many of the statistics about income inequality use pre-tax income and don’t include government benefits. Plus, they generally do count retirement accounts such as 401(k)s but don’t count the value of future Social Security, pension payments or home equity. These exclusions all bias the statistics in favor of making economic inequality look worse than it actually is.

Another example of this sort of cherry picking is when somebody touts a change in spending that doesn’t account for substitution effects. Most economic impact studies extolling the benefits of sports team and stadiums fall into this category, neglecting to account for the fact that the spending reported is simply reallocated from some other type of spending (perhaps on restaurants or movie tickets). A sports team moving to my town does not suddenly make me richer; to buy tickets I have to not buy something else. It is possible for a locality to gain by shifting spending from outside the region (as occurs from tourism and the convention business), but many studies do not confine themselves to such events.

The myth of student loan debt slowing the economy also falls in this category. Former students saddled with loan payments have less to spend on other things, but the lender who is receiving those payments now has more money to spend. Lending and repaying money does not hurt the economy, it just shifts who gets to spend money at a particular time, not the amount being spent.

While I could go on, failure to account for changes in data definitions will be the final category of lies using economic statistics covered here. A perfect example is the claim that labor’s share of national income has fallen over time. As ably demonstrated by James Sherk, the statistics used to claim labor’s share of income has fallen neglect the fact government changed the way it allocates self-employment income. Roughly 80% of self-employment income used to be awarded to labor, with the remainder being counted as a return to the entrepreneurs’ capital. Since 2001, the BLS changed its procedure to be more a 50-50 split. While not the only problem with the statistics commonly used, with self-employment rising this change has a non-trivial effect on the statistic in question.

Hopefully, this column will make you a better-educated consumer of economic statistics, wary of claims backed up by the misuse or outright distortion of economic data. If you learn to recognize these categories of lies based on improperly employed or misinterpreted statistics, you will have a much easier time seeing through false claims and responding with precise criticism of the flaws in the economic statistics used to mislead people. With a little effort on the part of my readers, I hope this column will help reduce the amount of lies based on economic statistics that are leading to widely-held misperceptions about the economy and poor policy decisions.