







window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-4', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 4', target_type: 'mix' });





Image 1 of / 5 Caption Close Image 2 of 5 A detail of my sassy red Gap blazer. A detail of my sassy red Gap blazer. Image 3 of 5 The corresponding Sherwin-Williams paint color is Real Red. The corresponding Sherwin-Williams paint color is Real Red. Image 4 of 5 Coordinating paint colors to Real Red recommended by the app. Coordinating paint colors to Real Red recommended by the app. Image 5 of 5 App allows you to match colors on the spot 1 / 5 Back to Gallery

After seeing an ad in Architectural Digest for the Sherwin-Williams ColorSnap iPhone app, I decided to try it. It’s also available for Blackberry and Android phones.

I installed the free app, then took an iPhone photo of a detail of my sassy red Gap blazer. You can either upload a photo into the app or snap one through it.

Next, I chose an area of the image that I wanted to “sample.” Once you pick the sample, a menu bar pops up and you can either “View Color Details & Save,” “Add Another Color” or look at “Coordinating Colors.” In the “View Color Details & Save” screen, it tells you the Sherwin-Williams paint color and number.

I of course did all three and the results of the test when it comes to the coordinating colors were a blue-gray and a taupe-ish beige.

Additional features (pulled from the Sherwin-Williams website) are:

Create a custom palette or Ask Sherwin-Williams for colors that complement your color.

Search for specific colors or browse the full Sherwin-Williams color palette right from your iPhone or Blackberry, or Android smart phone.

Fine tune colors using lightness, saturation and hue features.

Save colors to your “My Saved Colors” library to compare palettes or share via Facebook and email.

Learn detailed color information, including color names, RGB values, and LRV numbers–all with the ColorSnap app.

Find a Sherwin-Williams store near you.

My thought is that not only can you use this for paint colors, of course, but also for coordinating colors in your furniture, textiles and home accessories, as well as your outfits. Just use the app while you are out shopping for home goods or clothing and voilà, easily matched colors.

Even if you are great at coordinating colors on your own, the app might come up with combinations you hadn’t considered, so it’s worth consulting it.

Do you have any favorite design apps? If so, share them in the comments or email me at melanie.warner@chron.com.