After a 15% collective pay cut in 2007, chief executives of the 500 biggest companies in the U.S. (as measured by a composite ranking of sales, profits, assets and market value) took another reduction in total compensation, 11%, for 2008. The last time the big bosses took a pay hit for two consecutive years was in 2001 and 2002. In total, these 500 executives earned $5.7 billion in 2008, which averages out to $11.4 million apiece and computes to less than 1% of total revenues and 3% of total profits of their companies.

SORT LIST BY

FILTER LIST BY

Industry - Aerospace & Defense - Banking - Business Services & Supplies - Capital Goods - Chemicals - Conglomerates - Construction - Consumer Durables - Diversified Financials - Drugs & Biotechnology - Food Drink & Tobacco - Food Markets - Health Care Equipment & Services - Hotels, Restaurants & Leisure - Household & Personal Products - Insurance - Materials - Media - Oil & Gas Operations - Retailing - Semiconductors - Software & Services - Technology Hardware & Equipment - Telecommunications Services - Transportation - Utilities

FEATURED

The Right Way to Pay

Emily Lambert

Companies are under the gun to devise pay packages that reward long-term performance rather than short-term greed. A fair number of enterprises do so already.







Test of Mettle

Christopher Helman

Steel giant Nucor pays for performance and shuns layoffs, even in the worst of times. Chief Dan DiMicco keeps the faith.







Dim Bulb

Daniel Fisher

GE's Jeff Immelt had a tough act to follow. But that doesn't excuse his performance since taking over for Jack Welch.







A Magna Carta For Corporate America

Carl C. Icahn

Limiting executive compensation won't keep bad managers from running rampant.







Why Your Boss Is Overpaid

Tim Harford

Surprise: You are the reason why the fat cat in the corner office makes big bucks.







Mo' Money, Mo' Problems

Dan Ariely

Massive bonuses might actually cause poor executive performance.







The Biggest Bonuses Ever

Nicole Perlroth

Forget AIG--these executive payouts really break the bank.

VIDEO

Top Paid CEO: Larry Ellison



How Oracle's chief made $544 million in '08 and which CEO is the most valuable.