Before getting to the point — the possibility that liberal trolls pretending to be Men’s Rights Activists (MRAs) are creating fake “hate” against women — permit me to clarify something: I am both a journalist and a conservative and do not think those two things are contradictory in any way. I was a full-time newspaper reporter, editor and columnist for nearly a decade before I became a conservative in the mid-1990s, and so my perspective on politics and media bias is somewhat different than many other conservatives.

All that is preamble to explaining my attitudes vis-a-vis the whole MRA movement and the so-called online “Manosphere.” You go to war with the army you have, as they say, and the current situation regarding feminism — which has become the “Sex Trouble” project — clearly requires an institutional base outside the currently existing ideological/political system. It would be foolish to expect, inter alia, the Heritage Foundation or National Review to get down in the trenches of the War of the Sexes as it is currently being fought. There are a handful of conservative journalists (including Ashe Schow of the Washington Examiner and Cathy Young of the Daily Beast) who “get it” in terms of the mutant totalitarian strain of feminism that has erupted into public spasms of raging insanity the past couple of years. However, there is generally a shortage of attention being paid to this by conservative media, and so we must build something new and different.

There is an existing network of online popular opposition to feminism, but this presents its own problems. Whereas mainstream conservative organizations allied with the GOP tend to be wimpy and prone to run for the hills the first time someone calls them ugly names, the grassroots “Manosphere” is the exact opposite: A lot of pissed-off-and-fed-up people who feel like they’ve been fighting a guerrilla war against feminism for years and who have a predictable tendency to Say Things You Wouldn’t Want to See Quoted in the New York Times.

No big deal, really. Grassroots is grassroots, and you cannot expect “message discipline” from random people on the Internet. However, the Left (of which feminism is a subsidiary) loves to play the guilt-by-association game, so when the spotlight suddenly shines over there where you’ve been fighting your guerrilla war, you can predict that they will do their “links-and-ties” tactic to try to discredit you. Trust me, my friends, I’ve got the scars of old battles and many tales to tell you about how this game is played, but let’s get down to a practical example.

Aaron Clarey wrote an article at Return of Kings highly critical of the new movie Mad Max: Fury Road. Because I almost never go to movies, I don’t really care about this any more than I care about any other vile poison emerging from Hollywood. Was it scripted by Catharine MacKinnon based on a novel by Andrea Dworkin, directed by Sheila Jeffreys and produced by Anita Sarkeesian? I don’t know, but it’s apparently got the whole Tough Action-Hero Chick thing happening, which is very much a feminist-approved theme, and Return of Kings is not down with anything that feminists approve.

However, it is not Aaron’s opinion of this movie, but rather a comment someone left on his article that caught my attention because it caught the attention of a left-wing “male feminist” Whose Name Shall Not Be Written Here. The comment by “TS77RP1” reads thus:

The only way back is to begin punishing ambition in our daughters and in all female children. They need to be physically and psychologically disciplined to be servile and deferential and they unfortunately need to have it beaten into them that they should NEVER trust their own judgement and always seek guidance and permission of their male headships.

My daughter would be turned out with nothing but a shirt on her back if she so much as looked at a college website or played with her brother’s educational toys.

She would be belted to the point of being unable to sit if she exhibited confidence in decision making.

I don’t want my wife to step foot out of the house unless her every dime and minute spent can be accounted for and executed in conjuncture with my approval. My daughter will exude obedience and timidity for whoever her future husband is and it’s imperative that all Christian Men demand nothing less within their own homes. Playtime for feminazis and the left is over. This is our world and our heritage to protect. Let the cultural war begin!

Well, this is a horrifying thing to read, but is it authentic? I did a search for “TS77RP1” and this comment has apparently been deleted from Return of Kings and, furthermore, the only places on the Internet where that handle can be found are all quoting the left-wing “male feminist” Whose Name Shall Not Be Written Here.

If it walks like a moby and talks like a moby, it’s probably a moby, and if you don’t know what a moby is, you should learn.

moby

An insidious and specialized type of left-wing troll who visits blogs and impersonates a conservative for the purpose of either spreading false rumors intended to sow dissension among conservative voters, or who purposely posts inflammatory and offensive comments for the purpose of discrediting the blog in question.

The term is derived from the name of the liberal musician Moby, who famously suggested in February of 2004 that left-wing activists engage in this type of subterfuge: “For example, you can go on all the pro-life chat rooms and say you’re an outraged right-wing voter and that you know that George Bush drove an ex-girlfriend to an abortion clinic and paid for her to get an abortion. Then you go to an anti-immigration Web site chat room and ask, ‘What’s all this about George Bush proposing amnesty for illegal aliens?’”

Was the commenter “TS77RP1” such a troll? I strongly suspect it. Having seen firsthand the insidious deceptions that the online Left is willing to employ, this would be par for the course. This doesn’t rule out the possibility Dictator Dad is real, but I’m extremely skeptical.

Anyway, let this be a warning to the grassroots opposition to feminism: Keep your eyes open for similar dirty tricks.

Team Clinton is playing for keeps, you know.











Share this: Share

Twitter

Facebook



Reddit



Comments