The UK has recently introduced a national Internet censorship scheme, a national ID card and is about to spend 12 billion pounds pushing the British population's web-searches, emails, sms messages and telephone callings records through a central database run by its spy agency, GCHQ. This month saw a secret UK court hearing, with secret participants, produce a secret order to secretly gag the population, the terms of which are secret and the revelation of which is punishable by up to 15 years of imprisonment. How many of these orders exist is unknowable--we glimpse at the severity of the problem only when the orders are violated. THEY ARE GOING TO TRY AND GAG US 2008_12_24 EXPECT TO CONFRONT IT ALL OF A SUDDEN http://wikileaks.org/wiki/ Secret_gag_orders_undermine_core_Western_values Wed Dec 24 19:19:54 GMT 2008 "UK undermines core Western values" British courts continue to disgrace Enlightenment values. This month saw a secret UK court hearing, with secret participants, produce a secret order to secretly gag the population, the terms of which are secret and the revelation of which is punishable by up to 15 years of imprisonment. How many of these orders exist is unknowable--we glimpse at the severity of the problem only when the orders are violated. Secret gag actions are usually associated with the likes of Saudi- Arabia, China or North Korea. Closed-door justice for the wealthy emasculates the UK population and grants succor to repressive regimes across the globe who can look to the UK for validation. It is time these orders were treated with the contempt they deserve. Wikileaks previously released the gag order for the Northern Rock bank collapse, now we release the secret gag order made by High Court Justice Tugendhat on Dec 15, 2008, aimed at covering up an email leak from the British establishment. The secret order was first targeted at UK newspapers, but our copy was destined for the UK Parliamentary blogger 'Guido Fawkes', editor of 'order-order.com'. The summary states: 1. The identities of the Applicants/Claimants must remain confidential. 2. The fact of the existence of the Orders must remain confidential. 3. The terms of the Orders must remain confidential. The order concerns emails from Zac Goldsmith, a noted 2005 Conservative party recruit, and social climber sibling Jemima Khan. Both are hairs to the late billionaire financier Sir James Goldsmith. Needless to say there are no teachers, small business owners or technicians being granted secret media gag orders in the UK. The order states that anyone who knows of the order must obey it, so plaintiff lawyers Carter Ruck have served the order on media outlets across the British Isles. Britain is an increasingly dangerous Western disgrace, but you won't hear about it in the British press. The examples needed to elucidate just how the country is failing can not be mentioned, accelerating its decline. In the last five years Britain has become the world's largest arms exporter, the preferred home of Russian and middle-eastern oligarchs, the world center for "libel tourism" and, as far as we can tell, the Western capital of secret gag orders. Only a week ago, on December 17, the High Court of London gave the go ahead for a libel tourism action against the New York Times. The same day the Hon. Denis MacShane (Labour) with two MPs from other parties, told Westminster that UK courts had become a "Soviet- style organ of censorship". The UK has recently introduced a national Internet censorship scheme, a national ID card and is about to spend 12 billion pounds pushing the British population's web-searches, emails, sms messages and telephone callings records through a central database run by its spy agency, GCHQ. This month also saw British police go into Parliament, without a warrant, and rifle through the files of a senior member of the opposition, the Hon. Damian Green MP, who was alleged to have leaked trivial details about immigration policy to the press. What's left? The Gulag? THEY ARE GOING TO TRY AND GAG YOU EXPECT IT

