How is December treating you all thus far? Well I hope.

We’re settled into our new place in Portland (I’ll be sure to post pictures on Instagram soon!), and getting back into our groove. It’s always amazing to me how much a move can disrupt life. A two-week break becomes a month and before I realize it, I haven’t properly exercised in weeks, reach for takeout at every turn, and my email is overflowing. It’s moments like these when I realize I’m more of a control freak than I’d like to admit. My schedule is seriously important to me.

Thankfully, I’m feeling a bit more “normal” now, whatever that means in this season of life. We even have our Christmas tree up and I’m feeling quite festive with my “Indie Holidays” station blaring in the background as I work.

Of course, a new space has required some reorganization as well as a few new purchases (for home, office and otherwise), and in the process we’ve managed to simplify and streamline a bit more (which we love).

I’m planning to create a “Simple Kitchen” post soon to highlight everything we own in our “minimalist” kitchen to show you just how possible it is to do more with less stuff.

Until then, let’s eat pie, shall we?

Have you guys tried our Vegan PB&J Pie yet? It’s one of my favorites.

In the process of making it I discovered the magic of date paste and coconut whipped cream mixed together to create a thick, custard-like mousse, perfect for pies and even no-churn ice cream! Since then I’ve been dying to try it in another variation.

Enter: Chocolate Peanut Butter.

This magic starts with coconut whipped cream and date paste. Then a generous amount of melted dark chocolate and a giant heap of salted creamy peanut butter.

Hubba, hubba indeed.

The result is a rich, thick chocolate mousse infused with salty peanut butter piled into perfectly salty-sweet graham cracker crust – literally the pie of my dreams.

This pie is simple, requiring just 7 ingredients and easy-to-follow methods.

If you can master date paste (pitted dates whirled into a paste) and coconut whipped cream (chilled coconut cream whipped into an airy mousse), then you can totally make this pie. And, I highly recommend doing so because it’s bomb. Yes, I still say bomb (Rhonda). Deal with it.

This pie is my new favorite. It’s:

Creamy

Thick

Rich

Chilled

Super chocolaty

Infused with peanut butter

Perfectly sweet

Nestled in a graham cracker crust

Delectable

Satisfying

& Perfect for holiday gatherings and beyond

One bite into this bad boy and I was done for. I took two slices and shared the rest with a friend, who later reported she ate three slices in two days. That’s when you know it’s good – you can’t keep your hands off it.

If you make this pie, please let us know! Take a picture and tag it #minimalistbaker on Instagram, @minimalistbaker on Twitter, or leave a comment. We seriously love seeing what you guys cook up.

Happy holiday baking season, friends! There’s much more sweet (and savory) goodness to come in the next few weeks. Cheers!