Continuing the largest global bitcoin event, Inside Bitcoins is coming back to Seoul, South Korea. It will feature some prominent industry figures speak on emerging crypto and FinTech innovation.



"Session topics will include an introduction to blockchain-based technologies, creating the next killer app, emerging payment platforms, P2P lending, digital banking, smart contracts, multi-signature wallets, investing in Bitcoin 2.0 and blockchain startups, regulatory compliance, crowdfunding, Bitcoin exchanges, and what lies ahead", the Inside Bitcoins website reads.



The event will be held on December 10-11, at the Korea International Exhibition Center and will showcase current blockchain solutions, mobile payment processors, and many others from the financial tech sector.



"From mobile money startups to the burgeoning FinTech industry, Inside Bitcoins Seoul provides the inside scoop on alternative finance and the next wave of blockchain connected economies. Given that global investment in Fintech ventures has tripled in the last year, this is one event that you can't afford to miss!" the website reads.



Roger Ver, Bitcoin's first angel investor is one of the keynote speakers at the conference. He will discuss the significance of free markets and how Bitcoin and blockchain technology will help this cause, along with his involvement with investing in the Bitcoin industry and more. He told Bitcoin.com he looks forward to speaking at the event saying:



"Up until now, most of the English speaking world has been unaware of the fantastic bitcoin businesses being built in South Korea such as coinplug.com this conference should help to change that." He added, "Bitcoin is about tearing down artificial financial barriers around the world. As an economic and societal hub in Asia, Seoul is a fantastic place to have a bitcoin conference."



Other than Roger Ver, the conference will also feature speakers like Simon Dixon of BnkToTheFuture, Andrew "flip" Filipowski of Chicago tech and financial visionary, Jonathan Mohan of BitcoinNYC, Jeremy Gardener of the prediction market project Augur, and many more.