About

Our Story:

Alexandria Brewing Company was envisioned by our Head Brewer, Andy Reynolds years ago. After two tours in Iraq, Andy found that the process of brewing different beers helped put his mind at ease. He took his love for brewing and decided to follow that path for his career. In 2015, Andy went to the Siebel Institute of Technology, America’s oldest and most respected brewing institution, to master his craft.

The reason we chose Alexandria, Kentucky as a destination for our brewery is that it is a close community where people still take the time to say “hello.” Andy’s wife, Ann, was raised in Alexandria. Together they own land, where Andy grew his first hops.

We envision Alexandria Brewing Company as a family-friendly establishment celebrating rock and roll, fun, and, the best beers around.

The main objective that all of us here at Alexandria Brewing Company agree on is to build a business that has integrity. This is a key foundation in all facets of ABC. Having worked in various corporate positions and seeing how some companies treat employees and consumers, we want to create an honest company that gives back and treats all people involved like we would want to be treated.

Alexandria Brewing Company will be brewed in Cincinnati tradition. Proudly made in Kentucky.

See more of our story at www.alexandriabrewingcompany.com

Goals:

We have set a goal of $30,000 with a stretch goal of $60,000 and a crazy goal of $100,000. The goal is the minimum we need to get this project off the ground. The stretch gets us everything we need with minimum investor support. The crazy goal will set a Kickstarter record for a brewery.

Kickstarter Campaign Rewards:

Thank you for supporting Alexandria Brewing Company! Contributions bring rewards! Contributing $30 or more will get you invited to our Pre-Opening Celebration. You will be among the first to see what Alexandria Brewing Company has to offer as this would be our "soft opening" by invite only event. If you contribute at a level of $200 or more, you will get early access into this event, giving you first dibs at any special releases we may have created just for this event.

Here is a summary of the different contribution level rewards:

$5: a premium ABC sticker as well as our inside email list. You will be first to know about any new release well ahead of the general public including information on experimental releases that will not be advertised ahead of time. We will NOT sell your information or bombard you with emails and you can you choose to opt out of this now or any time. The sticker and email reward will be included with any of the reward levels below.

$15: your choice of an Alexandria Brewing Company snifter, pint glass, or tulip glass. The glassware will be branded with the ABC logos and will be exclusive to the Kickstarter campaign.

Belgian Tulip

Pint Glass

Snifter

$25: some unique choices:

a men's (black) or ladies' (heather red) T-shirt featuring the Alexandria Brewing Company and Kickstarter contributor logos.

Unisex T-Shirt - Black (Sizes M-XXL available)

Ladies' Soft Fitted T-Shirt - Heather Red (Sizes S-XL Available)

Back of ladies' shirt

OR Cheers to Craft’s unique jewelry-- a pair of earrings or pendant (each piece will vary). The pieces are hand made using malted barley, hops, backed with real silver, and presented in a gift bag.

Cheers to Craft Hop Pendant

Cheers to Craft Earings (malted barley)

$40: a full set of the limited edition Alexandria Brewing Company branded glassware (snifter, pint, and tulip set).

$45: BOTH the pendant and set of earrings from Cheers to Craft jewelry (see $25).

$50: Cincy BrewCast Special! A unique swing-top growler and a set of Belgian tulips, all with the limited edition Alexandria Brewing Company logos. This special is limited to 50 backers, but can be added by pledging an additional $50 to any reward level over $70. If you choose to add this on at the higher pledge levels, please include this information when you submit your shipping information to us.

A.B.C Growler w/ tulip glasses

$70: our exclusive Kickstarter Campaign zip-up hoodie, featuring our logos.

Zip-Up Hoodie (Sizes S-XXL Available)

$75: the Cheers to Craft jewelry set and the limited edition glassware set (see $40 and $45).

$80: our Bomber Club Card Membership. This guarantees you 6 bombers. We will e-mail you before each limited release, and you can use your Bomber Club Card to reserve 2 bombers at no charge, or if the release doesn’t interest your tastes, you can wait for the next release opportunity. Bomber Club members will also have the benefit of reserving 4 additional bomber at regular price during any release The card is good for 5 years from the day of our first bomber release, giving you plenty of time to take advantage of it. This offer is limited to 200 pledges.*

$100: the Bomber Club Card Membership and the limited edition glassware set for a great experience for every limited release.*

$150: the Sapper Club Stein. These 24 ounce steins are hand crafted from Little Delaware Pottery Company. Each stein is individually numbered by the artist. With the purchase of this stein, we give $2 off our flagship beer purchases FOR LIFE and fill this stein with your choice of a couple of our flagship beers as long as you bring the stein on your visit (our quad and our tripel are eligible for the discount but will not be filled in the stein). These are limited to a total of 250 contributors (180 at this level and 60 more broken up at higher level combinations).

Sapper Club Stein

$155: a spot in the One Fife Fife Club. Each member will receive the Bomber Club Card Membership, a hoodie, and your choice of the limited edition glassware set or the Cheers to Craft jewelry set (see $80, $70, $40 and $45).*

$175: the Sapper Club Stein and the limited edition glassware set (see $150 and $40).

$200: the title of Introductory Engineer. Your name will be inscribed on a brick in our biergarten, and you will receive early access to our annual anniversary party, held to celebrate our funders, including you!

$225: makes you an A & O Engineer with Alexandria Brewing Company. Our growler has been accused of looking like an oversized hand grenade. So, why not have something that symbolically builds and destroys? With this level you will get our limited edition Kickstarter growler and you will be immortalized in our biergarten by inscription on your own brick. You will get all the benefits that come with the Introductory Engineer level.

Limited Edition Kickstarter Growler Included with Essayons Engineer

$250: the title of Essayons Engineer. We will have your name inscribed on a brick in our biergarten and you will receive early access to our annual anniversary party same as the Introductory Engineer. However, we will throw in our glassware set and your choice of t-shirts. Please select style (men's or ladies') and size when you submit your shipping information to us.

$300: the title of Sapper Engineer. This reward is a combination of the Introductory Engineer and the Sapper Club Stein (see $150 and $200).

$500: a spot at our Pre-opening Shindig. You and a friend will join Andy, our president and head brewer, and the Alexandria Brewing Company team for a catered meal. There you will sample several of our completed beers and tour the facility. Andy will be available to answer any questions you have about the beer, the brewery, and his experiences in brewing. Additionally, you (unfortunately, not your guest) will take home a Sapper Club Stein. This level is limited to 30 contributors (see $150).**

Sapper Club Stein Included with Shindig

$750: you and 9 friends attend the Private Pre-opening Experience.*** This includes a catered meal, a private tour, and samples of completed beers, as well as some still working in the fermenter. Andy, our president and head brewer, will be on hand to answer any questions you may have. This may be the answer to an upcoming bachelor / bachelorette party, rehearsal dinner, business meeting, etc. You will also receive the Engineer brick engraved to immortalize your experience in our biergarten (see $200). This reward is limited to 10 pledges.**

$1200: experience our Brew with the Brewer. This is the ultimate “beer geek” experience for you or the beer lover in your life. Spend a day with Andy, our president and head brewer, learning how to brew on a professional system. If you are a home brewer, this is your chance to learn what you need to take it to the next level. You will get to design a beer and brew it on our pilot system. You also get to name it (pending TTB approval). Once your beer has completed fermentation, Alexandria Brewing Company will keg it and serve it at our taproom. Of course, you will get the first glass on us. If successful, your beer will become part of our seasonal rotation. If this happens and we bottle it, we will give you one bottle of it at release for life. We will be ultra-flexible on the brewing day. This also includes our Kickstarter hoodie, our glassware set, the Bomber Club Membership Card, and Introductory Engineer inscribed brick. This is limited to 5 contributions.**

* Must be of legal drinking age at time of redemption in order to claim / use this reward.

** Must be of legal drinking age to partake in any samples of product containing Alcohol. Guests under the legal drinking age will be treated to a selection of non-alcoholic beverages including craft soda.

*** If you are interested in this option, but feel like you need more than 10, please contact Brian Fish at brian.fish@alexandriabrewingcompany.com. We may be able to accommodate more with a higher contribution.