Left-Wing Antifa Terrorists ATTACK Police at Patriot Prayer Rally In Portland (VIDEO)

Sunday, left-wing Antifa terrorists ambushed the peaceful Patriot Prayer rally in Portland, Oregon at Waterfront Park.

The Patriot Prayer group is a conservative entity that is in no way affiliated with white nationalism. In response to the group showing up to peacefully assemble, hundreds of Antifa members swarmed to violently protest the assembly.

Portland Police put up barricades to separate the two parties, but they neglected to properly man the barricades and focused more on the roadways. Antifa quickly jumped on the opportunity and started throwing various projectiles and smoke bombs and some attacked officers with a fire extinguisher.

Antifa is throwing irritant smoke and projectiles at police. — Portland Police (@PortlandPolice) September 10, 2017

Antifa chased Patriot Prayer away after being approached by police officers in crowd control gear. Multiple Antifa arrests were made at the time and following those arrests, more Antifa began assaulting police officers with slingshots with at least one officer injured.

Antifa knocks down the barricade then starts chanting “antifa!” Over and over. pic.twitter.com/6Dt22qBP7M — Mike Bivins (@itsmikebivins) September 10, 2017

Video footage courtesy of Mike Bivins’ Twitter account.

Arrests made, scuffles with protesters. Getting crazy pic.twitter.com/tof2nPqjb6 — Mike Bivins (@itsmikebivins) September 10, 2017

People were allegedly throwing fireworks at cops, among other things:

People throwing fireworks at cops, and other stuff. Absolutely crazy down here on the Waterfront. Spraying a cop with a fire extinguisher pic.twitter.com/o9wCpAyic8 — Mike Bivins (@itsmikebivins) September 10, 2017

Portland Police stated that “the crowd it has become violent and criminal in nature . . . If you are a peaceful protestor, leave now or be subject to arrest.”

Police advising the crowd it has become violent and criminal in nature. If you are a peaceful protester, leave now or be subject to arrest. — Portland Police (@PortlandPolice) September 10, 2017

Press down at the scene were also attacked:

Officers are reporting that photographers are being attacked by protesters. — Portland Police (@PortlandPolice) September 10, 2017

People yelling at police right now for their treatment of protestors. Something went off. People running away from state troopers now @OPB pic.twitter.com/C9QeZHSGnK — Ericka Cruz Guevarra (@erkagvra) September 10, 2017

More video from moments ago. Lots of action. Hard to call it all. Just watch pic.twitter.com/G8VHJ3aQm0 — Mike Bivins (@itsmikebivins) September 10, 2017