As I mentioned yesterday, Hollywood does not like it when Halloween falls on a Friday. The new films have smaller Fridays but larger multipliers, while holdover films get murdered on Fridays only to double their Friday numbers on Saturday. There were only two new wide releases this weekend, plus a timely reissue. So it's no surprise that the top new film of the frame is Nightcrawler, with $10.7 million for the Halloween frame, just below the $10.7m second weekend of Ouija. Obviously the numbers could change when final figures are released tomorrow, but for the moment let's ignore the ranking thing.

The Jake Gyllenhaal thriller capitalized on superb reviews (it's one of the best films of the year, hands-down) and a vaguely "scary" marketing campaign from Open Road Films to hold its own against Ouija as the de-facto Halloween movie of choice for the weekend. The picture cost just $8.5m to produce which means it's well on its way to being profitable. Gyllenhaal is generally good for around $10-14m on an opening in a lower-profile film like this (think End of Watch or Source Code), so this is right in his wheelhouse. Had it pulled in the same $10.4 million opening weekend next weekend, it would have been eclipsed by Big Hero 6 and Interstellar. But this weekend it is the so-called top film, and Open Road Films deserves credit for cannily scheduling a somewhat unconventional thriller in a weekend where it wouldn't face much competition and it had the slightest tinge of being seasonally-appropriate. Of note, Jake Gyllenhaal is becoming something of a George Clooney, using his star power to make smaller, artistically interesting films that don't necessarily require blockbuster debuts to break even.

The other semi-wide new release was the Nicole Kidman/Colin Firth thriller Before I Go to Sleep. The film opened with next-to-no buzz and few pre-release reviews, so the fact that it opened over the weekend with $2.03 million this weekend is not a surprise. It’s another blockbuster debut from the new distributor that gave us And So It Goes ($4.6m) and Legends of Oz: Dorothy's Return ($3.7m). As of now, the distributor doesn't seem to have anything on its future slate, so the short life of the distributor may be one of those weird box office stories of 2014. Although to be fair, even Summit Entertainment had to deal with a learning curve with the likes of P2 ($2m debut for a really great thriller by the way) and Sex Drive ($3.6m for an okay sex comedy with a fun James Marsden turn) before it had Twilight and Red. As for Nicole Kidman and Colin Firth, Mr. Firth was never a box office draw while Kidman has long gone out of her way to pick projects that don't necessarily scream "box office smash."

The only other major new release was the 10th anniversary theatrical reissue of Lionsgate's Saw. The "house that Jigsaw built" celebrated the anniversary by dropping the film into 2,000 screens for this week only, but audiences didn't seem to care. The film made just $650,000 over the weekend. If the idea was to gauge interest in a reboot or continuation four years after the fact, I guess it’s “game over." As a fan, I'm glad. Saw was a defining franchise, but I don't need to see another property extended well-beyond its natural shelf life and/or revived purely because it's a known entity. Besides, the last installment, four Halloweens ago, was the series low-point, so I'd rather just pretend the series ended at Saw VI. Daniel Radcliffe's Horns has been on VOD for awhile and has already earned $1m from the pre-theatrical release, so A24 isn't too busted up about its $104k in 103 theaters theatrical debut. It's also a terrible movie, so there is that too.

In holdover news, Universal's ( Comcast Corp.) Ouija earned $10.7 million to top the box office for the second weekend in a row. The horror film of the season, by default, dropped 43% from last weekend, which is a shockingly good hold for a horror film that inspired no buzz and no love. Universal's positioning of the picture the weekend before Halloween weekend was a smart one, and the film was helped quite a bit by the holiday. The $5m cheapie now sits with $34.8m in ten days. I actually saw it last night at the wife's request. It's not remotely good, but it's somewhat more watchable than Annabelle for whatever that's worth. Lionsgate's John Wick recovered from its Friday night dive, doubling its numbers on Saturday and ending the frame with a mere 44% drop. The Keanu Reeves vehicle earned $8.05m over its second frame and has now earned $27.5m domestic. I'd like to think the film will have legs even as the holiday onslaught begins, but at least John Wick will not go quietly into that good night.

St. Vincent earned a stunning $7.75 million on its second weekend of wide release, actually increasing 0.001% from last weekend. The Bill Murray/Melissa McCarthy comedy is proving to be a true crowd-pleaser and has now earned $19.53m domestic. I saw the film yesterday, and while it could have been written in a quirkie indie comedy Mad Libs book, it works and it's a pure audience pleaser. I don't know how serious the film is as an Oscar contender, but if it plays all season and ends up doing far outgrossing the likes of Whiplash and Birdman along with this month's The Theory of Everything, The Imitation Game, and Foxcatcher, it may be a bigger player than initially presumed. Guardians of the Galaxy has earned $765.1m worldwide to become the year's second-biggest global blockbuster after the $1b+ Transformers: Age of Extinction. It has earned $94.3m in China alone.

Warner Bros.'( Time Warner Inc.) The Judge earned $3.4 million (-22%), bringing the Robert Downey Jr. vehicle's current total to $39.5m. Annabelle earned another $2m (-40%) on its last remotely viable weekend to bring its cume to $82.5m. Dracula Untold crossed $50m domestic on Friday and now sits with around $52.8m domestic after earning $2.94m (-33%) over the Halloween weekend. Brad Pitt's Fury earned $9.1m on its third weekend. The Sony release has somewhat quietly earned a solid $60.4m in 17 days and may-yet find itself in the Oscar race if the December front-runners (Inherent Vice, American Sniper, Unbroken) don't click. Addicted earned $675k over the weekend for a new $16.4m domestic total. Book of Life earned $8.3m on its third weekend, down just 17% as Day of the Dead fell on Saturday, to bring its total to $40.5m. Hopefully this one can survive Big Hero 6 next weekend.

Walt Disney's Alexander and the Horrible Terrible No-Good Very Bad Day dropped just 10% over the frame, earning $6.4m and bringing its cume to $53.6m. Gone Girl surpassed the $127 million gross of The Curious Case of Benjamin Button on Thursday to become director David Fincher's biggest grosser in America. The film is holding strong and earned $8.8m this weekend to bring its cume to $136.6m. What I said about Oscars and Fury goes double for Gone Girl, as I'm half-inclined to predict a Best Picture win at this stage if the half-dozen or so November/December contenders don't break through beyond acting/writing recognition accordingly. The Equalizer earned $1.8m over the weekend resulting in a $96.5m cume for the Denzel Washington vehicle. Finally Birdman expanded to 231 theaters and Fox Searchlight's would-be Oscar champ earned $2.51m ($11k per screen) and brought its domestic cume to $5m.

That's it for this week. Join us next weekend for the start of the holiday season, as Chris Nolan's Interstellar (opening on Tuesday night in select locations) and Walt Disney's Big Hero 6 kick off the holiday season (see reviews for both on the left sidebar). Also, the Stephen Hakwing biopic The The Theory of Everything (which I have shamefully procrastinated in terms of writing a review for) opens in limited release on Friday. Here is a top-10 list courtesy of Rentrak: