Next week, the Museum of the Moving Image in Queens will host special screenings of Blade Runner, Ridley Scott's 1982 film about an apocalyptic future in which special police forces hunt down escaped human androids known as "replicants," featuring a Q&A with its original screenwriter, Hampton Fancher, and Fancher's 1999 film starring Owen Wilson as a serial killer, The Minus Man.

The subject of a new documentary about his decades-long career, Escapes, Fancher spoke with me this week about making movies, drugs and the wonder that Blade Runner isn't as terrible as he thought it would be.

In the 34 years since it was released, Blade Runner has developed cult status, in part because it – like a lot of dystopian films of the 1970s and '80s – had a certain prescience. What do you think about when you look back on the film? I’m pleased in some invisible way within myself that something connected with people, in the prophetic aspect of it. But that seems very normal, very natural, to me, that we connect things in our minds. Not that I’m blasé. I’m glad that I was involved in something that’s proved to be so pertinent.

What originally inspired you to adapt Philip K. Dick’s novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? into a feature film? Aside from the detective narrative, which enticed me to think it could be a film, the significance had to do with ecology, from the eco-movement of the 1960s. And it came out of our experiments with LSD. We got really close to the trees, the grass, the bugs – we saw the world through acid. I started to think, "Oh, shit – this is the end of nature." I wanted to blow the whistle a bit. I mean, I wasn’t seriously blowing the whistle – I’m just a pipsqueak, everyone’s a pipsqueak – but I wanted to do something.

What kind of headspace were you in at the time? There was a doomful feeling, that we were killing the environment, that the birds won’t be chirping. But it’s an odd sort of dichotomy, because there was joy in the process too. [Hieronymus] Bosch must have had a good time painting hell. We wouldn’t want to be in it, but in a way, we get cozy when we’re in the midst of ugly predictions.

How do you think the film has aged? I don’t really know. I haven’t seen it for a while.

You recently wrote a sequel to Blade Runner, titled The Shape of the Final Dog, that’s in pre-pre-production now. Tell me about that. It’s a new character, a new detective. I was literally writing the last sentence of the story and the phone rang, and it was Ridley asking if I had any ideas for a Blade Runner sequel. I said, “You must be at the bottom of the barrel” to be calling me.

When was that? That was about three years ago. Then, about a year ago, I went out and saw a lot of the graphics they were developing, and they blew my mind. I was glad with my script, but I still thought, “How do you beat the old Blade Runner?” I think this does it.

Blade Runner has a campiness that contemporary science fiction films don’t have. Do you think that filmmakers today go overboard with CGI? I don’t know what you mean by “campiness,” but in filmmaking it’s always the same: If it’s contrivance and transparent, it’s shit, but if the world they create is compelling and convincing, then they’ve got you. It’s one of the liabilities of artifice, but in the end, it’s all about character.

Say more about that. If something doesn’t have character, then it’s just style, nothing but flash. Authenticity is character, and character is physical. If it was hollow, banal, small talk trying to dress itself up, you’d walk away and shudder. But the new Blade Runner – and the cast, and the director – I knew they hadn’t made any mistakes. I think it’s going to be a very satisfying experience.

Let’s talk about The Minus Man, which you wrote and directed and is screening next week at the Museum of the Moving Image in Queens. Minus Man is a very special film for me. I’m afraid there will only be six people in the audience, but I’ll go because I want to see the ambience.

What do you mean by that? I’ve learned through the years that every time you see a film it’s different – depending on the audience. The mood of the room spreads and infects everyone there – it’s like a virus. And I’ll be interested to see Minus Man, because it’s very personal to me. A critic came up to me at the San Francisco Film Festival and I worried that he was going to go on about Blade Runner – people do that all the time, tell me that Blade Runner is one of their favorite movies – but he said Minus Man and I hugged him.

What makes Minus Man so special for you? The experience of making it was so satisfying that I just wanted to do it again. And it’s about what a lot of things are about, maybe the most important thing that anything could be about. It’s what the bible is about – I don’t know, I’ve never read the bible – but it’s about good and evil. That shimmers – spiritually, intellectually, emotionally – to me. And everybody worked so hard on it – they didn’t want to go home – and together we created a universe. It was like being a kid in the backyard with a bunch of other kids building a tree house.

And that was different than making Blade Runner? Oh yeah, Blade Runner was such a bad experience that so many of the people involved never wanted to make another film.

What made it such a bad experience? Rancor, lack of communication, you name it. I wasn’t involved for most of it – David Peoples took over the writing process and I just came back in the end to help with the rooftop scene – but a lot of people didn’t like each other.

And yet, it turned out OK in the end. That shocked a lot of people. Because how could that be good? The poison involved in that film – the insecurities, the anger – it was a junkyard that turned into fertility. Everybody did their jobs superbly, but still there was torture involved – self-inflicted torture, but still, torture.

Did you think that would affect the film? I thought the film was going to be terrible – especially the voiceover. But when I went to the premiere at the Academy, and saw that opening shot of the cityscape, you could just feel this tacit applause in the audience. When it was over, I went searching for Ridley so I could congratulate him for doing what couldn’t be done. I was thrilled.

Still, Blade Runner was a commercial flop when it was released. Yeah, but I wasn’t even unhappy when it turned out to flop. Everyone struggled to make it, and there was fear that it would go belly-up. The working conditions were tough, and there wasn’t enough money to do all the things we wanted to do. And we shot it on this little back lot at Warner Bros, but goddamn, there’s a world there. That was some technical magic.

And now it’s considered one of the greatest films of all time. I don’t think there’s another film in history that flopped and then came back and did the opposite of flop. I was surprised by how deep its legs are. Even now, when people talk about it – I just don’t get it. Why is it such an important film? I have thoughts about it, and talk to people about it, but nothing definitive. It's like art itself. It’s the soul of the thing, the character.