Thor: Ragnarok (In cinemas 26 October 2017)

This movie needs to span from the end of Age of Ultron until the start of Infinity War. Im not joking. Thor is going to be a busy boy.

We know a few things to start this journey, most notably is that Thor is on his own side quest to find out what the deal is with the Infinity Stones. I can’t imagine how this is going to go well without Odin’s help, and as we know from the end of the last Thor movie, The Dark World, Odin isn’t exactly himself at the moment. This lack of knowledge on Odin’s (read: Loki’s) part will be what triggers Thor into realising the trickery going on. The whole Stone deal will also be what gets Loki to tag along with his brother – the only person who Loki can actually trust to keep him safe from Thanos’ rage, considering the end of the first Avengers movie.

All of this, however, does nothing to resolve the overall question of where Odin is, and has been, since Loki deposed him. What little I’ve seen of the set pics and the bits and pieces of marketing seem to imply that Odin is on Earth. I guess it’s the last place Thor would look? I dunno, who wants to try work out how Loki’s mind works. Anyway, Loki has probably lost track of his father, given the time and effort he’d have to give to ruling Asgard, which is why he and Thor visit the good Doctor Strange. Well, I guess its’ going to be mostly Thor doing the visiting, considering Loki is a bad guy and Strange probably doesn’t care for his sort.

Changing tack a little bit, the start of the movie will have the traditional thing where we start hundreds, maybe even thousands, of years in the past and will detail the basics of Hela, and her imprisonment, or banishment or whatever it is they call it. Something something Ragnarok prophecy. Something Surtur. Something Odin dies.

Seriously, though, I don’t know how this is going to go down. This is going to be a busy movie, and I haven’t even got to the part where Thor takes his little trip yet.

Let’s see. In his last act as King of Asgard, Loki releases Hela from her bonds; call it his insurance policy. Allowing her to leave Hel and move about the realms freely. While on Earth, looking for Odin, Hela destroys Mjolnir, kills Odin (which sends him to Valhalla) and sends Thor to Hel. Sure, let’s go with that.

Potentially unknown to Hela, the death of Odin triggers Ragnarok, releasing Surtur and starting that whole thing. Meanwhile, Thor is trying to escape Hel and ends up on Sakaar. The backwater planet. Where everything eventually ends up, like <insert your favourite place to pick on here>. From here, Valkyrie takes him to Jeff Goldblum, who is playing Jeff Goldblum again. Jeff pits him against TIH because thats gonna be awesome to watch. Thor hits Hulk enough to make Bruce fall out and the two of them make their way back to whats left of Asgard.

Thor fights Hela, resealing her in Hel. Hulk fights Surtur, resealing him back where he belongs and Asgard is destroyed, in its entirety.

Ragnarok, however, generally implies a rebirth. A starting again. In the comics, after the Ragnarok event a few years back, Asgard ended up floating above a town in Oklahoma. I predict something like that happening in the MCU after this movie.

Which brings us, almost neatly, to the end. But lets not forget that this is supposed to lead directly into Infinity War. So how does it do that? While Asgard may indeed be on Earth after the dust has settled, that doesnt mean Thor will be. He and Big Green will be let loose upon the stars somehow which will get them picked up by The Milano. Now, I dont think the Guardians will be in Ragnarok, but there will be some explicit thing which lets the audience know thats what happens. Maybe as the screen cuts to black and the credits start, we hear Hooked on A Feeling? I dunno. Something like that.

After credits scenes. Obviously the first one will be the “trailer” to Infinity War. Potentially the teaser that was shown at the conventions earlier in the year, maybe a series of small scenes from the movie itself. Something along those lines. While the second will be similar to most other ones, showing an epilogue of sorts to the movie itself. Maybe Sam Neill’s character? Perhaps Surtur and Dormammu talking? A hint at the future of the Thor franchise, while maintaining a level of silliness and not-real-relevance.