Remember the star of Windy City Heat? Wondering what he’s been up to? His publicist/agent Tom (the best in the business) is here to keep you up to speed. –

–

Perry is the most unique client I have ever worked with. Even as I type these words, I feel that I’m failing to convey just how challenging representing the man can be. As Perry’s publicist/agent, it’s tremendously challenging to work with someone who’s presently in the system. Of course Perry will be the first to admit that he’s the sole person responsible for putting himself there, but that doesn’t alleviate the considerable challenges we are presented with. How does one represent a client that can’t actually get work?

The answer lies within the “F-word,” and by that, I of course mean faith. My faith in Perry is what keeps me going. I have been asked many times by my colleagues how I can possibly work pro bono for guy that offers so many challenges within the industry. My answer has always been, “I have faith in Perry Caravello.” I have faith that Perry will one day get out of the system, make reparations for his previous misdeeds and become the star that he was always destined to be. However, Perry cannot do this on his own. He has dug himself a rather deep ditch and he’ll need a rope to get himself out. Will he use that rope to pull himself up or will he simply hang himself with it (metaphorically speaking of course)? Time will tell.

Perry ran into some problems on Facebook back in February and had to shut things down for a while. First Perry became a proud supporter of N.A.M.B.L.A. (North American Man Boy Love Association) when he proclaimed his love for the notorious group that advocates pedophilia. Perry went as far as posting photos of stickers from the group that were affixed to his car and truck. Supporting this despicable group was of course a very bad decision, though to be fair, Perry was told the group stood for Negative Allegations Made By Legendary Actors. Being a legendary actor himself, Perry was honored with the affiliation.

Shortly thereafter, Perry made another poor decision when he decided to unleash everyone that was on his blocked list on Facebook. Many of whom were bad people who did not have Perry’s best interest at heart. Within one hour of being freed from the confines of Perry’s blocked list, one such individual took control of Perry’s account. Claiming to be a voice from Perry’s past, this person assumed Perry’s identity and made some wild accusations. Thankfully, the account was eventually restored thanks to help of Don Barris, who had also informed Perry of the true meaning of N.A.M.B.L.A.

For now, Perry has been laying low and trying to keep out of trouble.He’s also been spending hours upon hours watching various television shows. He’s currently obsessed with both “New Girl” and “Breaking Bad.” Perry Caravello is a man who likes to bathe himself in great acting, so he feels the combination of Zooey Deschanel and Bryan Cranston will help him dust off his own acting chops. Those chops will be more than ready to strike when the time comes. Yes, I have faith.

But enough from me, let’s hear from the man himself. I asked Perry if he would be kind enough to write down what he’s been up to over the past couple of months and he generously took the time to shoot this video.

-TOM BRENNAN