Nasty rumors regarding Ben Affleck’s solo Batman film have been making the rounds for a while now, but the project may have reached a new Bat-low. According to FSW sources, Affleck wants out of the film altogether. Which means he would no longer portray the Dark Knight in subsequent films set in the DC Extended Universe. In addition to Affleck ditching the project, recent hire Matt Reeves, director of Cloverfield and War for the Planet of the Apes, has already backed out as well.

This doesn’t bode well for fans of the series as similar situations have hit the production of The Flash film as well. But fear not faithful nerds, there is a new glimmer of hope for Batman!

A trusted FSW source has reported that the genius filmmaker behind hits such as Chronicle and Fantastic Four has been tapped to direct, produce, write, and star in The Batman.

That’s right, Joshua Trank, the guy fired from the Boba Fett solo Star Wars anthology film, is taking over the next Batman film. But don’t worry folks, Trankman’s trusty sidekick, the screenwriter boy wonder, Max Landis will be assisting with writing duties. Landis is no stranger to the DC universe, as he has written a well-praised Superman comic and has a sequel story releasing sometime this year. The duo are a solid choice but what about Trank’s acting chops? Could he really replace Affleck as the Caped Crusader. Well, no. He doesn’t plan on portraying Batman, but rather he would be the main villain of the film: the Riddler, alongside Joe Manganiello’s Deathstroke.

Trank as the Riddler? Sounds odd but okay, we’ll take it. Then what about the World’s Greatest Detective? Who will portray him since Affleck has departed? Christian Bale?

As it turns out The Force Awakens star, Oscar Isaac, is being eyed by Trank to be his Batman. Isaac would be the same Batman as Affleck’s similar to Michael Keaton, Val Kilmer, George Clooney all being the same Batman in the Tim Burton/Joel Schumacher series of the late 80’s/early 90’s.

According to a source close to Isaac, his Batman will be more of a detective than any previous film adaptation of the character, and the Riddler is a great psychological villain who could rival Heath Ledger’s Joker in The Dark Knight if portrayed correctly. Isaac is said to be close to sealing the deal with Trank and Landis for the project.

Star Wars fans should be excited to see Oscar taking on a great lead role like this, but we at FSW are worried that another lackluster superhero film could tarnish his acting resume. What do you think of this news? Is Trank the right director for The Batman? How about Isaac as the Dark Knight? Let us know in the comments below!

Stay tuned to FakingStarWars.ner for more Star Wars related news worth faking. Same fake time, same fake website! Be sure to follow us on Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, and YouTube for the latest updates.

-Link “Voxx” Voximilian

Please follow and like Faking Star Wars: