Preview | Recap | Notebook

Heat-Rockets Preview

By NOEY KUPCHAN

Posted Mar 04 2014 1:21AM At this point, LeBron James may never take his mask off. Coming off the highest scoring performance of his career, James tries to lead the visiting Miami Heat to a ninth straight win and eighth in a row over the Houston Rockets as two of the NBA's hottest teams square off Tuesday night. James put on a show in Monday's 124-107 win over Charlotte, posting a franchise-record 61 points while making 22 of 33 shots. "The amazing part is the efficiency," teammate Shane Battier said. "Good Lord. Sixty-one on 33 shots, that's Wilt Chamberlain-esque. That's pretty amazing. Incredible performance." The four-time MVP also set team records with most points in any quarter (25 in the third) and most in the second half (37). He finished 8 of 10 from 3-point range after making his first eight attempts. "The man above has given me some unbelievable abilities to play the game of basketball. I just try to take advantage of it every night. I got the trust of my teammates and my coaching staff to go in there and let it go," he said. "Every night I go on the floor I want to be the MVP, of this league, MVP of this team, MVP for me, myself and my family. I've set a high standard and I have to live by that." James, who has been wearing a protective mask to shield a broken nose, has averaged 37.1 points on 63.7 percent shooting while playing in seven of Miami's eight consecutive wins. The Heat (43-14) have outscored opponents by an average of 13.9 points during their run. "If he's going to shoot the ball like that from that range, there's nobody that's going to beat them," Bobcats coach Steve Clifford said. The Rockets haven't been able to slow down Miami, which is averaging 112.6 points over a seven-game winning streak in the series. James is averaging 33.8 in the last four meetings, and Dwyane Wade is at 31.3 in his last four. The Rockets (40-19) have won 11 of 13 after beating Detroit 118-110 on Saturday. Terrence Jones led the way with 22 points and 10 rebounds, and James Harden scored 20 to go with 12 assists. The Rockets improved to 25-3 when Jones scores more than 10. Houston took a 23-point lead into the break before letting up a bit in the second half. "I thought we should have really put the foot on the gas," All-Star center Dwight Howard said. "We didn't. We allowed them to get back into the game, and that is not what we need to do if we want to be a championship team." The Rockets are 17-3 against Eastern Conference opponents, including 12-0 at home. The Heat are 17-4 versus the West, and 8-2 in the second half of back-to-back games. "Great team, it's going to be a good challenge for us," said Harden, whose team is on the verge of a season best-tying sixth straight home win. "Limit our turnovers and rebound the basketball - if we do those two things, we'll be in good hands." Harden had 36 points, a career-high 12 boards and seven assists in a 114-108 loss at Miami last Feb. 6. James and Wade scored a combined 63 in that game. Wade sat out Monday to rest his knees, but he figures to play in this one. He is averaging 23.5 points while shooting 62.1 percent in his last four games. Houston's Chandler Parsons could also return after sitting out Saturday due to a sinus infection. The Heat's Erik Spoelstra was named East coach of the month for February, and Houston's Kevin McHale won in the West.

Copyright 2014 by STATS LLC and Associated Press. Any commercial use or distribution without the express written consent of STATS LLC and Associated Press is strictly prohibited Copyright 2014 by STATS LLC and Associated Press. Any commercial use or distribution without the express written consent of STATS LLC and Associated Press is strictly prohibited

Howard, Harden lead Rockets over Heat 106-103

By KRISTIE RIEKEN

Posted Mar 05 2014 12:08AM HOUSTON (AP) LeBron James was wiped out - and it showed. Dwight Howard had 22 points and 16 rebounds, James Harden added 21 points and the Houston Rockets held James in check Tuesday night during a 106-103 win over the Miami Heat. James had a chance to tie the game with a desperation 3-pointer at the buzzer, but it was off - just like most of his second-half shots. The four-time MVP finished with 22 points, one night after setting a club record with a career-high 61 against Charlotte. He acknowledged before Tuesday's game that he was "extremely tired" and that he spent most of the day sleeping. James had 19 points by halftime, but appeared to drag at times in the second half and spent the first half of the fourth quarter on the bench. He was 1 for 7 after the break. "I fought through it in the first half. Second half it just wasn't there for me," James said. "Got out of rhythm." Still, the Heat cut their deficit to three when Michael Beasley hit a 3-pointer with 21.2 seconds left. Harden threw the ball away after that, and Howard accidentally hit James in the face when they both went up to try to grab a long pass. James lay on the court holding his broken nose for a few seconds before getting up and slowly walking to the bench. He has been wearing a protective mask to protect his nose. James remained in the game after a timeout, then missed the desperation 3 with Howard in his face. "I knew I had to put up a heave over top of him," James said. "I felt like I got a good look - just a little long." The Rockets used the word composed repeatedly after the game to describe their play. "There's no need for us to get worried," Howard said of the team's mindset after Beasley's 3. "Situations like that, the best thing we can do is stay composed. If we point our finger or put our heads down, it gives the other team confidence. That's something we've been trying to work on all year." Dwyane Wade had 24 points for the Heat after sitting out Monday night. Beasley also scored 24, a season high. Miami never led, but tied it twice in the fourth quarter. Houston used an 11-2 spurt to take a 104-95 lead with less than 3 minutes remaining. "We were able to push back in the fourth quarter and tie the game up," Wade said. "But we had to exhaust so much energy trying to come back." Houston led by 13 early in the fourth before two separate runs by the Heat tied it at 91 with 7 minutes remaining. The also tied it at 93 before Houston used its late run to close it out. "We did some good stuff," Rockets coach Kevin McHale said. "We made some plays. ... I thought during stretches in this game we played really well." The Heat had made consecutive 3-pointers to cut the lead to seven early in the fourth quarter when Chris Andersen blocked a shot by Donatas Motiejunas. Andersen stood under the basket after the block and taunted Motiejunas, drawing a technical foul. Miami then used an 8-0 run, which included a 3 by Beasley, to cut it to 88-87 with 8 1/2 minutes left. Houston opened the second half with a 9-2 run capped by Chandler Parsons' dunk over James. Shane Battier had a basket for Miami after that, but Houston reeled off six straight points to extend the lead to 68-56. An airball on a 3-point attempt by Wade was one of three missed shots by the Heat in that span. The Rockets were up by nine soon after that when Harden launched a long alley-oop to Howard, who barely grabbed it in time to sail over Chris Bosh for the dunk. Howard picked up a foul with about 5 minutes left in the first half when he ran into James as he was driving to the basket, causing him to lose control of the ball, which bounced off James' mask. A reverse layup by James and a free throw by Wade in the last 20 seconds of the first half cut Houston's lead to 53-52 at halftime. The Rockets jumped out to a 7-0 lead and were up 39-32 at the end of the first quarter. NOTES: Hall of Fame center Hakeem Olajuwon, and Houston Texans stars Andre Johnson and Arian Foster attended the game, as did Minnesota Vikings running back Adrian Peterson and former Astros pitcher and seven-time Cy Young Award winner Roger Clemens. ... James said the best compliments he received following his big game against Charlotte came from the two most important women in his life. "My mom and my wife saying how proud they were of me and that I never cease to amaze them," he said. "So it's always great when your family gives you that type of gratitude and response."

Copyright 2014 by STATS LLC and Associated Press. Any commercial use or distribution without the express written consent of STATS LLC and Associated Press is strictly prohibited Copyright 2014 by STATS LLC and Associated Press. Any commercial use or distribution without the express written consent of STATS LLC and Associated Press is strictly prohibited