ORLANDO, Fla. (August 10, 2017) - Orlando Pride midfielder Maddy Evans has announced her retirement from professional soccer. The five-year National Women’s Soccer League (NWSL) veteran will play her final match on Saturday, Aug. 12, at Orlando City Stadium when the Pride host Sky Blue FC.

“My decision to walk away happened very fast but I’ve accepted a job back home in Pennsylvania. It wasn’t an easy decision but, for me professionally and big picture, it’s the perfect fit and best option at this time,” Evans said. “I want to thank all of Orlando City, especially my teammates, the fans and the entire organization for providing me a chance to really feel what it means to be a professional soccer player. These two years have been an experience I’ll always remember.”

“It’s with very mixed feelings that we see Maddy go. The first is obviously sadness that we are losing a player with such influence on the team, both on and off the field, and with such a great relationship with our supporters. Maddy has been an unbelievable team character, irreplaceable in that sense. So it’s with a lot of sadness we say goodbye,” Head Coach Tom Sermanni said. “But, at the same time, it’s exciting for her to look at this opportunity that’s cropped up. Having five years as a professional in the league, she feels the time is right to move to the next stage in her life and career and we share her excitement for that. We wish her every success for the future.”

Evans, 26, was acquired with the Pride’s No. 9 pick in the 2015 NWSL Expansion Draft after three seasons with the Boston Breakers. The midfielder has appeared in 27 matches for Orlando, making 16 starts. On Sept. 7, 2016, Evans set up Alex Morgan’s go-ahead goal at Sky Blue FC with a perfectly placed chip over the backline.

Prior to her move to Central Florida, Evans was a staple of the Boston Breakers midfield, totaling 2,250 minutes over 46 appearances with the club. Evans scored two goals and added three assists with the Breakers.

A graduate of Penn State University, Evans also played for Brisbane Roar in Australia’s Westfield W-League during the 2016-17 season.