A man smokes a joint during a march calling for the legalization of marijuana at Paulista Avenue in Sao Paulo, Brazil, on May 23, 2015. Members of the Brazilian Association of Patients of Medical Cannabis and other people marched calling for the legalization of marijuana, either for its medical benefits or for recreational purposes. AFP PHOTO / MIGUEL SCHINCARIOL (Photo credit should read Miguel Schincariol/AFP/Getty Images)

In 2000, The New York Times labeled the dotcom bubble as a "euphoric" time characterized by the period's extreme highs and subsequent crashing lows. The short-lived hyper success of the internet startup age did not die in vain; the phenomenon fundamentally changed technological innovation, business models, investment mentalities and the global financial markets. Now in our post-recessionary age, experts are predicting that similar to internet startups, cannabis will be the next industry to rock the business, financial and investment worlds.

More than 14 million Americans consume marijuana on a regular basis. Legal marijuana sales totaled $2.3 billion in 2014 alone whereas the illegal marijuana market is said to produce more than $18 billion in revenue per year. If we momentarily put aside the legal controversy, the numbers alone reveal that regulated cannabis is a major potential market that remains largely untapped. Despite the federal ban against the drug, there are currently more than 23 states and U.S. territories which have implemented some form of medical or recreational marijuana decriminalization. As more states pass marijuana legal reform, an increasing number of entrepreneurs and investors view the "Green Rush" as a major business opportunity with the potential to transform the pharmaceutical, food & beverage and commercial industries.

Some investors are wary of betting their chances on a product that the federal government still labels as a Schedule 1 substance. The disparate federal and state laws create an environment of uncertainty that make many investors rightfully nervous. Another concern lies in the recent high volatility of certain publicly traded marijuana stock which can be a reminder of the rollercoaster days we saw back in the dotcom heyday. Additionally, instances where cannabis companies released misleading or even falsified information about its employees and/or products has made it harder for investors to differentiate between legitimate operations with clean track records and shady businesses seeking to manipulate investors.