I realize that some of you are most likely wondering, “Why is he not writing about the Baltimore situation?”

Because, quite frankly, I believe that is a total waste of time. Like I wrote about the local story here about the guy who got shot by the feds here, when they were trying to arrest him:

The man was armed with a hammer, he tried to attack a federal officer, and he got shot. Just another day in the big city. But, as you know, because he is black, as was the agent that shot him; because of the stuff happening everywhere now, the left and their media lap-dogs are going to exploit this, in hopes that there is another riot in Detroit. Because that, is what marxists do. Marxists exploit stuff like this to disrupt the system. You watch and see, summer is coming and Detroit has a white mayor. You watch, another uprising is coming and the marxists will be in the middle of it.

Despite the fact that 3 of the officers involved in the situation in Baltimore were black, like here in Detroit where the fed agent was black, who shot the suspect — none of that matters. It is going to be portrayed as a evil white police force or in the case here in Detroit as a evil white Government killing blacks.

It is especially hazardous to one’s well being and livelihood, if you happen to be white and have an opinion that is not a part of the demented liberal socialist marxist politically correct stripe. Which is something Assistant Wayne County Prosecutor Teana Walsh found out the hard way:

Days after posting her opinion on how to deal with protesters and looters in Baltimore, Assistant Wayne County Prosecutor Teana Walsh resigned. Walsh, 35, did not make public comments about her resignation. The resignation was sent to Prosecutor Kym Worthy Friday afternoon in response to push back for her Facebook post about shooting people in Baltimore. Her post, from April 27, read in part “So I am watching the news in Baltimore and see large swarms of people throwing bricks, etc at police who are fleeing from their assaults … 15 in the hospital already.” “Solution. Simple. Shoot em. Period. End of discussion. I don’t care what causes the protesters to turn violent…what the ‘they did it because’ reason is…no way is this acceptable. Flipping disgusting.” Walsh, who was on maternity leave, was set to be disciplined for the post. Instead she voluntarily resigned. “This afternoon Assistant Prosecutor Teana Walsh called Prosecutor Kym Worthy to announce that she is voluntarily resigning her position with the Wayne County Prosecutor’s Office,” spokeswoman Maria Miller said in a release. “During her tenure in the office, Teana Walsh has been known for her great work ethic and her compassion for victims of crime and their families. Her post was up online briefly and she immediately took it down. The post was completely out of character for her and certainly does not reflect the person that we know.” Worthy called the potential discipline an “internal matter,” and didn’t say what it would have been. Activist group Progress Michigan released a statement about the incident calling into question all of Walsh’s work with the department. “Kym Worthy must conduct a thorough review of Walsh’s conduct,” Lonnie Scott, executive director for Progress Michigan said in a release. “For an assistant county prosecutor to call for the summary execution of disenfranchised and angered citizens shows she has little regard for justice or due process.” The organization claims it “holds public officials and government accountable,” in its mission statement.

Just so everyone knows Teana Walsh looks like this:

So, white people cannot have an opinion, that truly is a righteous opinion about what happened in Baltimore? It sure appears that way. But then again, that is what happens when you let Marxists rule the Country.

Update: Teana Walsh’s part of this story, is now a Memeorandum thread, with the usual left-wing suspects weighing in.