

and build better lineups today with FTA+ projections and chat We give DFS players the tools they need to stay in the green! Sign up free Join our community of 15,000+ registered membersand build better lineups today with FTA+ projections and chat

Suggested FAAB bids appear in green

Week 9 Waiver Wire Must Adds

Kenyan Drake – RB – Miami Dolphins (0% owned) | 26-31% FAAB

Darren McFadden / Alfred Morris – RB – Dallas Cowboys (35% / 38% owned) | 21% FAAB

Judge denied NFLPA motion for prelim injunction, but is keeping TRO in place for 24 hours to let NFLPA decide about filing appeal to 2nd Cir — Adam Schefter (@AdamSchefter) October 31, 2017

Juju Smith-Schuster – WR – Pittsburgh Steelers (47% owned) | 21% FAAB

Jack Doyle – TE – Indianapolis Colts (49% owned) | 16% FAAB

Week 9 Waiver Wire Suggested Adds

Paul Richardson / Tyler Lockett – WR – Seattle Seahawks (30% / 38% owned) | 7% FAAB

Seahawks fianl WR snap count:

Paul Richardson 56

Doug Baldwin 49

Tyler Lockett 39

Tanner McEvoy 20

Amara Darboh 10

Out of 69 — Nathan Jahnke (@PFF_NateJahnke) October 29, 2017

Josh Doctson – WR – Washington Redskins (43% owned) | 6% FAAB

Alex Collins – RB – Baltimore Ravens (34% owned) | 6% FAAB

Vernon Davis – TE – Washington Redskins (12% owned) | 5% FAAB

Marqise Lee – WR – Jacksonville Jaguars (35% owned) | 4% FAAB

Robby Anderson – WR – New York Jets (28% owned) | 3% FAAB

Week 9 Waiver Wire Deep League Pickups

Curtis Samuel – WR – Carolina Panthers With Kelvin Benjamin traded to the Bills Samuel should have the opportunity for more targets.

Danny Woodhead – RB – Baltimore Ravens (17% owned) Could start practicing this week. Targeting a week 11 return

TJ Jones – WR – Detroit Lions (3% owned) 8 targets, 4 receptions, 88 yards with Kenny Golladay sidelined. If all the higher owned WRs listed above are long gone, Jones may be available.

CJ Fiedorowicz – TE – Houston Texans (10% owned) Returned to practice last week. Eligible to return off IR Week 10. If you’re struggling at TE Fiedorowicz may be worth a stash

Tanner Gentry / Tre McBride – WR – Chicago Bears (0% owned) Gentry saw 32 snaps, McBride 23 snaps to lead the Bears WRs. Worth a look in deep leagues though they are both on BYE in week 9.

Leonte Carroo – WR – Miami Dolphins (0% owned) 6 receptions on 8 targets for 48 yards. Likely a result of the huge deficit against BAL.

Andre Holmes – WR – Buffalo Bills (0% owned) 3 receptions on 4 targets for 48 yards and a TD. Low volume will rely on TD to provide value.



Monday Night Special

Charcandrick West – RB – Kansas City Chiefs (5% owned)

The week 9 waiver wire pickups have arrived. Keep in mind that we’re reaching the point in the season where most roles are becoming clearly defined, thus a seemingly limited supply of waiver wire additions in deeper competitive leagues. If you’re a fan of my weekly rankings they will be published every Tuesday on ourand updated on a daily basis until kickoff. For one low price you also gain access to our daily NBA projections and private discord chat . Players appearing in my week 9 waiver wire article are owned in 50% or fewer of Yahoo leagues.To this point in his career, Damien Williams has been below average (not seeing over 4 YPC through three seasons), while doing most of his work in the passing game:With Jay Ajayi being traded to the Eagles owners should be scrambling to add the next man up in Miami, and while many depth charts say Williams, my money is on Kenyan Drake who Adam Gase anointed as the No. 2 running back back on October 6th . As you can see from Damien Williams 3 year stats he has more success in the passing game meaning Kenyan Drake should handle the early down work and goal line situations. In his only real work this season (week 8) Kenyan posted 6 carries for 22 yards against the Baltimore Ravens, and is now in line for 15+ carries per week (admittedly for one of the worst offenses in the NFL). SO WHY THE HIGH BID? This will be the question potential owners are asking, and the truth is you do not find starting running backs off the wire at this point in the season. Even in the event of an injury its likely the handcuffs around the league are owned. If you need a low end RB2 or weekly flex play, Kenyan Drake is the best bet for production assuming the Cowboys RB’s are all owned.By the time I’m finished writing this sentence Zeke’s suspension will probably be overturned again as this crazy saga of court battles continues. Elliott has 24 hours to final an appeal, which he almost certainly will do, so owners will have to follow the news closely. If the Elliott suspension is still expected to be upheld heading into Tuesday night Darren McFadden is a must add in all leagues. We still don’t know who the starter will be between DMC and Alfred Morris (in fact I’m holding both in my 12 team league). If you made me choose today, I’d go with McFadden as the guy, but if possible scoop up both as whoever fills the early down / goal line role will have solid RB2 value for 6 weeks.Juju Smith-Schuster drove the nail into Martavis Bryant’s coffin on Sunday night with a terrific 7 reception 193 yard 1 TD performance against the Detroit Lions, including a 97 catch and run that showed his explosive speed as he ran away from the Detroit secondary. Pittsburgh is on bye in week 9 so you’ll have to sit on this pickup for a week, however the schedule is positively juicy coming out of the bye with IND, TEN and GB all on the horizon. If you need a weekly WR3 and Juju is somehow still available he is the top waiver wire add heading into week 9Its surprising that Doyle is somehow still available in over 50% of Yahoo leagues as he has been racking up the targets from Jacoby Brissett. Over his past 3 games Doyle has seen an incredible 32 targets which has been converted to 25 receptions for 215 yards and 2 TD’s. Given the Colts poor defense they should be playing from behind plenty over the second half of the season, and Doyle appears to be Jacoby’s favorite target. If you need a TE and Doyle is somehow available scoop him up off waivers.As long time readers know, I like to follow the snap counts when scooping up WR’s off the waiver wire, however this is an interesting situation as Lockett is actually seeing more targets (Lockett 15 – Richardson 9) over the past 2 weeks. So the WR3 is seeing the superior targets, however Richardson is getting the red zone looks with 3 TD’s to Lockett’s 0 over the same time frame. I have to give the nod to Richardson here if you’re looking to acquire a WR off waivers thanks to Paul’s superior snap count and red zone looks. The only reason I don’t have Richardson as a must add is the notoriously fluky nature of touchdowns for guys not named Will Fuller.Things didn’t go exactly as planned for Doctson on Sunday against the Cowboys as he caught just one pass for one yard and a TD. The Redskins are quickly turning into the 2014 Chiefs who managed to go a full season without a WR touchdown. (The comparison here is meant for fantasy owners, in that there has been limited fantasy appeal at the WR position in WAS so far this season). The good news is that Doctson (50) had the 2nd most snaps to Crowder (56) so the targets should eventually materialize. If you are a Terrelle Pryor owner he now appears to be droppable as he has fallen to 4th on the depth chart behind Ryan Grant.Fantasy owners will be asking what has changed with Alex Collins from last week, and truthfully the answer is nothing. It was still a timeshare for the Ravens as Collins handled 18 carries to Javorious Allen’s 17 however Collins once again looked like the more explosive option as he went for 113 yards (while adding an additional 2 receptions for 30 yards). Unless we get word from Ravens practice that Collins is moving into the featured role I’d expect the timeshare to continue making Alex a risky boom or bust flex play thus the low suggested FAAB bid.Well here’s a surprise… Jordan Reed is injured again . Reed will likely be questionable all week with his balky hamstring so keep an eye out for injury updates. If he is ruled out before waivers open Vernon Davis looks like a nice one week plug and play against a Seattle defense that was just lit up by Deshaun Watson. Kirk Cousins has been consistently targeting his TE’s this season for big gains as evidenced by Vernon’s 17 catches for 292 yards (18.3 yards per catch). With injuries impacting Zach Miller, Charles Clay and Jordan Reed in recent weeks Vernon could be a viable option in deeper leagues with limited options.Fantasy owners have a way of ignoring guys who were on bye when waivers open so make sure you check to see if Marqise Lee (the WR1 for the Jags) is still available. Before their bye this past week Lee had 6 targets for 4 receptions and 72 yards. The week before that? 10 targets, 5 receptions and 83 yards. If you don’t want to be in a bidding war, or find yourself low on the waiver wire priority list take a look at Marqise as a viable WR3 for the 2nd half of your fantasy season.With McCown’s (25% owned also worth a pickup) solid play for the Jets Robby Anderson has slowly started to put together some consistency with 7+ fantasy points in 3 straight weeks including 2 straight games with a touchdown. Week 9 is no picnic as Anderson and the Jets will face the Bills, however their week 10 matchup with the Bucs looks much more favorable. If you are in need of a solid bench WR that can be plugged in to cover for bye weeks Anderson looks like the WR for you.Some league formats allow you to drop a bench player who has already played for a player who is yet to play. If you play in a league like this it is essentially a free lottery ticket for Monday Night Football.