One of the oldest and the meanest biryani joint in our city

The thing with an 80's born food lover is, that we dont say this stuff is '#todiefor' for any other chocolate shake topped with an oreo biscuit. But present us a meat dish at a hidden location with some mean flavors – bus! mic drop.



My earliest memory for this man's biryani has while been attending a farm house wedding (it was rarity reserved for the mighty souls once) in Delhi and spotting the largest silver vessel I had ever seen, it was love at first sight. There was no way I was not eating whatever came out of that magical looking pot, and one bite then had got me coughing out of my wits because of the spices. But years later the same spices had me intoxicated (its the same with all the vices, actually).



Babu Shahi Bawarchi covering half of the hidden parking lot of the Matka Peer Dargah is one the oldest mughlai food joints of our city, Dilli.



The location is a bit of a find, and the limited car parking space is only for visitors of the dargah. Its not the cleanest sight, but then when was that ever a case when all you want is a plate of goodness topped with some flavorful meat. The plate is as affordable as it wouldve been in the pre-demonitization days and the flavor is constant as it was in its heydays. But many now would diss out the same as newer flavors have spoilt us for choice, or its just the thing to do for any new food cat to put out an established food name so as to show the evolution of taste across generations. But say whatever, the aam aadmi food will get you the ultimate fulfillment, always.



If the food at this place doesnt get you excited, there is much more to explore if you are the 'wandering types' :)



Now some say, food is a great leveler and this place epitomised it where once all queued up together for that one pack of biryani, be it a high flying South Delhi resident, to the Uber mighty of Lutyens or the inhabitant of an east Delhi slum. Now that sight might be common in an ATM queue these days, but to imagine that in the mid 90's for a humble food stall was just #epic