Looking for some quick eats while touring Disney World’s Frontierland? Are the lines at Pecos Bill Tall Tale Inn and Cafe formidable? We have just the stop for you: Golden Oak Outpost.

Located near Splash Mountain, the little counter service stop offers a couple of hearty entree options as well as a few desserts.

I’ve stopped here several times on my travels, especially when this used to be the home of McDonald’s French Fries in Magic Kingdom (“There’s Gold in Them There Fries!”). But I’ve never done a review for you, so let’s get started!

Atmosphere

Golden Oak Outpost sports the same rustic, Wild West feel that you encounter throughout Frontierland.

The name — Golden Oak — is a reference to Walt Disney’s Golden Oak Ranch in California. The name is found elsewhere at Walt Disney World in the ultra upscale neighborhood of single family homes that are being built adjacent to Fort Wilderness Campground nearby.

Seating for Golden Oak Outpost is all outside. There are several tables and stools grouped next to the tiny quick service spot.

If it’s pouring rain or way too hot to sit outside, head over and snag a table at nearby Pecos Bill or Tortuga Tavern.

The kiosk is also located very close to the entry/exit gates for Magic Kingdom parades. Keep this in mind and plan accordingly if you think you might be grabbing some lunch or dinner here.

Eats

The menu at Golden Oak Outpost tends to vary according to season and crowd level. Pickings were slim the day that I visited, and consisted of two chicken options — a sandwich and nuggets. To round out the menu, there are also fries and a few dessert options as well as beverages.

Condiments, plastic ware, and napkins are neatly arranged off to the right. And for such a small menu, there’s a surprising number of options! A couple of sauces are great for dipping nuggets, or even for dressing your sandwich or adding flavor to fries.

Salt, pepper, and mustard are also handy in case you’d like to spice things up a bit.

There are also mayonnaise and ketchup for dressing and dipping.

Condiments for your coffee and plastic ware for eating round out the offerings.

When it was time to order, I went with the Fried Chicken Breast Sandwich. The sandwich comes dressed with shredded lettuce, diced tomatoes, and ranch dressing. It’s kind of like having a side salad on your sandwich!

It’s also served with your choice of fries or apple slices. I went for the fries.

The sandwich was a keeper! The bun was a little nondescript, but the chicken was nicely seasoned and breaded with a juicy texture and good flavor. I could have done without the salad, but actually the shredded lettuce and diced tomato was a nice change from slabs of veggies.

The Fries are those wonderful standard Disney fries — medium-cut and fried to a perfectly crispy golden brown, but still soft inside.

My food was fresh, delicious, and best of all — fast.

Overall

You probably aren’t going to make a special trip to Golden Oak Outpost. After all, the options here are available at lots of places.

But it is nice to know that you have some tasty choices way back in this corner of the park if you don’t want to queue up at the closest counter service. And if you happen to be waiting for the rest of your party to finish a ride and hunger strikes, this is a great spot to grab some nuggets or a sandwich.

Have you ever stopped by Golden Oak Outpost? Leave a comment and tell us your favorites!