I was looking for an unforgettable trip and I definitely got it!



a friend and I went to a weekend trip to LA to see what it got. we got to santa monica on saturday morning and spent the day on the beach, went to beberly hills and hollywood. we were looking for a place to stay since we didnt make a reservation. so we were looking for a place to stay in the hollywood 6 motel. but there wasnt any room for us. so we used our fancy GPS to find another one and sent us to Van Vuys. we got there again to the 6 motel, but we saw this other motels on the road. and the voyager motor inn got this good rate, so we went there. as other guys said in here. the first sight. looks like a place to have sex but we didnt realise the hole stuff. so we checked in, as long as we made it. there was this gang style guy coming into the hotel. it scared me, but i said ok. dont be a pussy, its just one guy, he might also be a normal person, not a gang guy. so we took our car and got into the parking. we didnt get the instructions to get into the building so we went to the cristal door on the parking entrace, and it was locked. went back to the parking trying to find a door and saw this couple whom I asked for the dorr. the guy barely looked at me and say I dont know where it is. so ok. i made a joke about it and walked to a blue door I found. so yeahp. we were in the building which didnt look as the entrace at all. it was a MAZE. there was a low light with all those corridors were really spooky, and after the gang look like guy, i was starting to be afraid it was not a good place. so we got to our rooms and the doors were really weak, and didnt want to open, and the phone was ringing. once I made it, i picked the phone up, it was the girl from the front desk. my friend had left his passport there, we needed to pick it up. so i got out my room again and there was a lady talling to my fiend, luckyly he didnt speak english, he didnt know what she was telling him. and i didnt know what was the deal. we went to the frontdesk, to pick the passport, we were there, and another gangstyle guy came in, so we picked the passport and walked to our rooms again. we saw two guys sitting there on the stairs whatching us. so we just walked and got into our rooms and before entering I joked "close the door and dont open even if anyone knocks". the room was small, didnt smell that bad, but it looked terryfing. I ripped off the blankets to check for any unwanted thing animal or not animal, but it seemed clean enough. checked on ever door for anything unwanted, since I was already frightened! everything seemed to be OK. so i just turned off the light and tried to have a sleep. I heard lots of noise, people fighting, children crying, loud music, Luckily no one knocked. the shower was not that that bad. Im not that special for hotels. Ive been to a bunch of hotels even in so rustic places, but this one definitely freaked me out. I tought someone was coming in to steal or kill me. and as I read other comments I really think we were lucky. My friend wasnt that freaked, until today we read the comments. I told him on sunday morning i just read about an killed guy on a motels parcking. So. at the end if you guys are looking for some extreme adventures get here. if you like a little bit more safety and peace. look for anotehr place.