You'd hardly say that the horror theme running through this series of Doctor Who has been an undercurrent, but in Mummy On The Orient Express, it bubbles right to the fore. As the Doctor tells us early on, there are many trains that have taken the name the Orient Express, but there's only one in space. And that's where we find ourselves for the vast bulk of the episode. It just happens to be the one where a Mummy is wreaking havoc.

Penned by Jamie Mathieson, making his Doctor Who debut, Mummy On The Orient Express thus mixes in solid ingredients. There's an Agatha Christie-esque mystery, with a bunch of passengers who get drawn into what's going on. It also has a play with the Universal horror movies of old - as does director Paul Wilmshurst, who we're coming to shortly - with the Mummy itself a really convincing and impressive creation. And it chucks in Frank Skinner, playing, well, Frank Skinner in a hat, for good measure. There's a song from Foxes at the start too, for people who like songs from Foxes.

If it sounds like eclectic ingredients we get here, then somewhat inevitably it's a bit of an eclectic episode. It doesn't quite mash together perfectly, but you're a long way from being shortchanged. There's certainly a little dab of Voyage Of The Damned about it, but it's the central conundrum of the Mummy, what it's doing, when it's doing it and why it's doing it that remains the thrust of the episode. Time is important, too.

What's disappointing - and we're treading enormously carefully to ensure we give nothing away (you can look for subtexts here as much as you like, but you won't find them) - is that it doesn't quite pick up the ramifications of the brilliant, yet divisive, Kill The Moon in the way it might have done. We're at the two-thirds stage of the series right now, but there's no sense that Doctor Who is coming in for its landing. That's not a fault of the contained story within this episode, we should note. In fact, there's an argument it's not much of a fault at all. Yet it's an inevitable reaction to the episode, after what happened last week.

That said, where Mummy On The Orient Express works is as a good, mainly standalone episode of Doctor Who. It's one that could have easily sat earlier in the run as here quite happily enough, but that's no problem. Capaldi holds this one together, and the main guest star, the aforementioned Skinner, isn't likely to trouble the BAFTAs, but is clearly part of the fun.

One person who should trouble the BAFTAs though is Paul Wilmshurst. Doctor Who series 8 hasn't been shy of very strong directors, but his work in this episode and Kill The Moon is of real merit. Mark him as a name to watch, because all the signs are there that he has a good feature or two in his future. More from him in Who as well please.

We'd like more from Jamie Mathieson too. He keeps his story contained, cares about what he's referencing, and puts together a good, solid 45 minute horror puzzle. At times not out of place in Russell T Davies' era of the show, Mummy On The Orient Express occasionally chugs, but still works perfectly well. Capaldi also remains one of the best casting decisions Doctor Who has made in some time.

Follow our Twitter feed for faster news and bad jokes right here. And be our Facebook chum here.