On October 15th, join us for VapeRally 2016, with featured guests Senator Ron Johnson (R-WI), the leading advocate for vaping in the U.S. Senate and Chairman of the Senate Homeland Security and Government Affairs Committee (which oversees the FDA), and invited Congressman Duncan Hunter (R-CA), the leading vaping advocate in the U.S. House of Representatives and the author of legislation to counteract the deeming regulations. Emcee for the event will be popular Radio Talk Show Host (and vaping enthusiast), Vicki McKenna. Music will be provided by Chris McKinley. Other exciting speakers to be announced. DON’T MISS THIS HISTORIC EVENT!

Let's unite the vaping community and small businesses owners as we support one another and learn ways to protect our livelihoods and grow our industry.

Be sure to attend, bring friends, and let the world know how important the vaping industry is to millions of people in Wisconsin and across the country.

VapeRally, sponsored by the Electronic Vaping Coalition of America (EVCA) and Johnson Creek Enterprises, will also be the first Wisconsin stop for the Right to Vape Bus Tour. The Right to Vape campaign is a joint project of The American Vaping Association, the Consumer Advocates for Smoke-Free Alternatives Association, and the Smoke-Free Alternatives Trade Association.

Attendance is FREE so please make sure to register now! We look forward to seeing you on October 15th at Johnson Creek Enterprises in Hartland!

The event is FREE. To help us with the rally expenses, please click here to support our efforts. THANK YOU.

















Paid for by the Electronic Vaping Coalition of America. Not authorized by any candidate or candidate's committee.

Contributions to the Electronic Vaping Coalition of America (a 501(c)(6) organization) are not deductible as charitable contributions on the donor’s federal income tax return. They may be deductible as trade or business expenses if ordi­nary and necessary in the conduct of the taxpayer’s business. We suggest you consult with your accountant or legal advisor.











