0 SHARES Facebook Twitter Google Whatsapp Pinterest Print Mail Flipboard

It was a bonzo gonzo crazy fest on FNC’s Hannity recently as Ted Nugent showed up and blasted the Obama administration as spitting in the face of average Americans. Nugent said, “Then they see an administration that is spitting on the US Constitution, the Ten Commandments, the Bill of Rights and the Golden Rule.”

Media Matters:

Nugent said, “Everybody I hang with the ranchers, the farmers, the cops, the teachers, everybody I hang with, they got an alarm clock. They get up they put their heart and soul into the being the very best they can be. They want to be an asset to their families, their neighborhood. They want to be the best they can be. They want to be productive members of society, and then they see an administration that is spitting on the US Constitution, the Ten Commandments, the Bill of Rights and the Golden Rule, so we the tea parties, we the people who are speaking up, I’m gonna quote my hero Dr. Martin Luther King, we who engage in non violent direct action are not the cause of tension, but rather bring it to the surface a tension that already exists. That’s the job of we the people to be watchdogs and whistleblowers. The government works for us. They’re absolutely out of control. The Tea Party, and what you stand for Sean, and I stand for, one big a-word, accountability. That’s our money, at least be honest and accountable.”

Ted Nugent has now become a non violent pacifist, but this video demonstrates otherwise:

In case you could not understand the audio, Nugent said, “I was in Chicago last week I said—Hey Obama, you might want to suck on one of these you punk? Obama, he’s a piece of shit and I told him to suck on one of my machine guns… Let’s hear it for them. I was in NY and I said hey Hillary—you might want to ride one of these into the sunset you worthless bitch… Since I’m in California, I’m gonna find- she might wanna suck on my machine gun! Hey, Dianne Feinstein, ride one of these you worthless whore. Any questions? Freeeeedom!”

Nugent is one to talk about accountability, when he has no semblance of it in his own life. The same man who was sitting with Sean Hannity discussing accountability once had to be hauled into court because he was a deadbeat dad who refused to support his illegitimate child, or how about Nugent admitting that he is a coward, who chickened his way out of serving his country in Vietnam? There is an a-word that comes to mind when I think of Ted Nugent, and it isn’t accountability. I can also think of an h-word, hypocrite.

Much like all of the other right wingers, Nugent is outraged that Obama is taking away God and freedom, yet he can’t name any freedoms that have been taken away or any instance where God has been lost. Ted Nugent’s little rant to Sean Hannity gives us a chance to point out that the Tea Party is nothing new. The same things that Nugent said about Obama were said about Bill Clinton in the 1990s, Ted Kennedy in the 1980s, Jimmy Carter in the 1970s, heck some of these things were even said about John F. Kennedy in the 1960s, and before him, FDR. The only thing more outdated than this rhetoric is Ted Nugent’s set list.

If you’re ready to read more from the unbossed and unbought Politicus team, sign up for our newsletter here! Email address: Leave this field empty if you're human: