ISLAMABAD: Pakistan has included on the top of its agenda the issue of Indian interference in Pakistan, including that country's alleged support for terrorists activities in the upcoming talks with India that are scheduled to take place in New Delhi on August 23 and 24.

Following yesterday's in-depth consultations between Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif and his close aides, Chief of Army Staff (COAS) Gen Raheel Sharif and Director-General Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) Lt Gen Rizwan Akhtar called on the premier on Tuesday at the Prime Minister House to discuss the upcoming visit of Adviser to the Prime Minister on National Security and Foreign Affairs Sartaj Aziz to New Delhi.

Also read: PM okays agenda for talks with India

The meeting was also attended by Finance Minister Ishaq Dar, Interior Minister Chaudhry Nisar Ali Khan, Sartaj Aziz and Prime Minister's Special Assistant Tariq Fatemi.

During the meeting, the military leadership gave its input on the subject of alleged Indian interference and emphasised that Pakistan must present its view point on core issues during the talks in a forceful manner.

The meeting also decided to keep 'unprovoked' Indian firing at the Line of Control (LoC) and Working Boundary and the killing of Pakistani civilians on the agenda of the upcoming meetings in New Delhi.

Highly-placed sources confirmed that Pakistan will stress on laying out a counter-terrorism mechanism between the two countries during next week's talks.

Qatar armed forces chief calls on PM Nawaz

Chief of Staff Qatar Armed Forces Major General Ghanim bin Shaheen Al Ghanim with Prime Minister Muhammad Nawaz Sharif at the PM House, Islamabad — PID

Chief of Staff Qatar Armed Forces Major General Ghanim bin Shaheen Al Ghanim called on Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif at the Prime Minister House on Tuesday, said a statement issued by the PM House.

According to the statement, matters relating to bilateral relations were discussed in the meeting.

The prime minister emphasised the importance of Qatar in the region and expressed satisfaction that Pakistan has always had a close relationship with Qatar, the strong foundations of which have been laid by the leadership of the two countries, the handout issued by the PM House said.

The premier also stated his preference for bilateral relations to be strengthened further, especially in fields with a high potential of cooperation, such as defence and industry.

During his visit, the chief of Qatari armed forces also shared his desire for warm ties between the two countries to further grow in all fields of bilateral cooperation, the statement said.