Toronto FC's injury list continues to grow after midfielder Will Johnson was released from Canadian national team camp in Austria with hip flexor soreness. According to Canada Soccer, he arrived in camp with the ailment, and it did not improve enough for him to play in today's match against Azerbaijan.

Johnson has since returned to Toronto to undergo treatment and testing for the injury. The extent of the injury is not known, nor is how much time the Canadian midfielder is expected to miss. Toronto FC does not play another MLS match until June 18, when they take on the LA Galaxy at home.

Per an agreement with the Canadian Soccer Association, Johnson was already scheduled to return to Toronto early from camp for Wednesday's Voyageurs Cup match. Toronto FC currently has a 4-2 lead over the Montreal Impact on aggregate heading into that semi-final match at Saputo Stadium.

For now, Johnson will join Tsubasa Endoh (contusion), Sebastian Giovinco (adductor) and Jozy Altidore (hamstring) on the Toronto FC injury list. How many of them will be available Wednesday, with the exception of Altidore, remains to be seen.

Toronto FC did, however, recently get some injury relief when Benoit Cheyrou returned to the lineup against Montreal. Defender Clement Simonin has also healed, and has been sent down to Toronto FC II in order to regain match fitness at the USL level.

The Canadian men's national team themselves are currently experiencing dwindling numbers due to injury and circumstances as well. Starting goalkeeper Milan Borjan left camp with a hand injury and striker Iain Hume will miss today's match with club commitments.

After today, Julian De Guzman and Marcel De Jong are expected to return to the Ottawa Fury for their second Voyageurs Cup leg. Ottawa currently leads the Vancouver Whitecaps 2-0 on aggregate. Canada has another match scheduled for June 7 against Uzbekistan that the pair will miss.

Canada is currently preparing for a crucial pair of upcoming World Cup qualifiers in September.