People who lived in the home as children allege that they were subjected to physical, psychological and sexual abuse over several decades up until the 1980s.

In March 2012, the RCMP and Halifax police began urging people to come forward with their allegations.

Investigators interviewed 40 complainants in Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Quebec, Ontario and Alberta, but by December of that year police said the information collected didn't support the laying of criminal charges because it could not be corroborated.

Class-action lawsuits were launched by the former residents against the home and the provincial government, which eventually ended in settlements totalling $34 million. The home came to a $5-million settlement with the plaintiffs in July 2013 and the Nova Scotia Supreme Court approved a $29-million award from the province a year later.

The lawyer who represents the former residents has said nearly 250 people who lived at the home from 1921 until 1989 are eligible for the class-action settlement payouts.

That agreement is before the Nova Scotia Supreme Court, where a judge has asked the law firm who worked on the case for the plaintiffs to provide a legal precedent to support their proposal to have people who joined the lawsuit in later years absorb some of the legal costs of the earlier claimants.

The lawyers have asked to be paid $6.6 million in legal fees, a proposal also subject to court approval. A ruling is expected Thursday.

The Liberal government has also promised to hold a public inquiry into the alleged abuse.

McNeil said the terms of reference will be set out to give former residents an opportunity to publicly share their stories, something that should happen early next year.

"This is not an inquiry that will be loaded up with lawyers. It's an inquiry that's about healing," he said Friday.

Former resident Tracey Dorrington-Skinner said she hopes the process will hear from as many people as possible.

The apology offered Friday served as validation and was a good first step on the road to healing, she said.

"The journey continues and I just hope that everyone takes advantage of the offer from the government to seek the help that they need," she said.

The home is now a short-term residential facility for children of all races.

By Keith Doucette, The Canadian Press