The inaugural Southside Storyteller Festival is set for Saturday in Birmingham's Five Points South.

The festival is centered on the Storyteller Fountain created by Frank Fleming that lies in the heart of Five Points South and celebrate 130 years of the Five Points Birmingham District, according to the Five Points Alliance.

The event, which will take place from 2 p.m. to 6 p.m., will feature street performances, fountain-inspired venue spaces, costumes and storytelling.

"We're so excited to be able to celebrate the creative and artistic minds of our city in a way that truly represents their skills and imaginations," says Joe Babin, owner of Orbit Salon and founding member of the Five Points Alliance Board of Directors. "The creative community of Birmingham has been growing at a rapid rate, so organizing a festival where individuals can debut their talents is going to be a great experience for everyone."

Local businesses of the Five Points area will transform their locations into "whimsical fantasies" in commemoration of the event. The day will also feature artistic performances around the famous Storytelling Fountain in the form of spoken-word, poetry and storytelling from groups such as Real Life Poets, Sister City Connection, Ada Long Creative Writing Workshop, Green Bucket Press and Arova Contemporary Ballet.

Attendees are also encouraged to dress up as their favorite story character or make up their own.

A highlight of the event will be the "Five Points Star" singer/songwriter competition. Local Birmingham artists have been invited to present their own artistic creations and voting for the competition has already begun online here.

The top 10 finalists from the online poll will perform their original works on stage between 4 p.m. and 5 p.m. Online votes will count for 25 percent of the final vote, with the remainder being cast on site following the performances. The winner will receive $500, have their song produced as a single with Ol' Elegante Studio and get airtime for the new song thanks to Birmingham Mountain Radio.