Look out, parents, comic books won’t just rot your kid’s brain, now they’ll turn him (gasp) gay! Or so claims homophobic busybody organization One Million Moms, which has just launched a boycott of Marvel and DC after the comic book publishing titans announced plans to include more prominent LGBT themes in upcoming stories.

Like so many conservative Christian watchdogs who attempt to rebrand anti-gay discrimination as “pro-family,” One Million Moms are quickly becoming a household name in the LGBT blogosphere. Any time mainstream pop culture portrays being LGBT in a positive or even neutral light, you can bet that an OMM boycott isn’t far behind. The group previously made headlines for attacking Ellen, a gay-inclusive GAP ad and an Archie storyline featuring same-sex marriage.

Towleroad quotes from an OMM press release:

Children mimic superhero actions and even dress up in costumes to resemble these characters as much as possible. Can you imagine little boys saying, “I want a boyfriend or husband like X-Men?”

The press release continues:

Why do adult gay men need comic superheroes as role models?

They don’t, but do want to indoctrate[sic] impressionable young minds by placing these gay characters on pedestals in a positive light. These companies are heavily influencing our youth by using children’s superheroes to desensitize and brainwash them in thinking that a gay lifestyle choice is normal and desirable.

DC Comics and Marvel are using superheroes to confuse them on this topic to raise questions and awareness of an alternative lifestyle choice. These companies are prompting a premature discussion on sexual orientation.

In addition to the boycott, OMM is urging its members to email their disapproval to DC and Marvel. But as Towleroad points out, since both comic book publishers “are receiving heaps of publicity and praise for their new stories, [they're probably] going to throw OMM’s screeds directly in the trash.”

Related Articles

Is Batman Coming Out of the Closet?

First Gay Superhero to Wed Longtime Boyfriend

Gay Marriage Archie Comic Sells Out Despite Attacks

Image credit: Jason Grote (Creative Commons)