Kreisel Electric, a small startup launched by three brothers in Austria, has been making a name for itself in Europe for having retrofitted some popular European-built electric (and non-electric) vehicles with their own battery packs and significantly increasing their range in the process. We reported on their VW e-Golf with a 55 kWh battery pack and Arnold Schwarzenegger’s custom all-electric Mercedes G-Class made by Kreisel.

Now the company unveils their latest project: a classic Porsche 910 converted to all-electric with a custom powertrain.

For its previous projects, Kreisel has been trying to get the attention of OEMs and show them that they can make better versions of their vehicles. This project is different since they are actually selling the car.

It’s not cheap: one million Euros ($1,065,000 USD).

While it’s clearly not for everyone, you can actually get a lot of out it. Of course, you get an all-electric version of a classic Porsche 910. Only 35 units were originally produced and later 4 were rebuilt by EVEX, this is one of them.

The all-electric performance of the car is also impressive thanks to the high-energy density 53 kWh battery pack that they managed to fit in a 1,100 kg (2,400 lbs) car:

“The high-performance (lithium-ion) battery pack, with a capacity of 53 kilowatt-hours, which is installed in the Kreisel EVEX 910e, weights 1.100 kilograms and enables a realistic range of 350 kilometres (217 miles). To accommodate the battery system as well as the powertrain in the rear, the frame of the original vehicle was slightly modified. Besides that the air-cooling of the historical vehicle was replaced by a cooling system which Kreisel developed for the high-performance drive.”

Those are decent specs and with a 0-100 km/h (0 to 62 mph) time of 2.5 seconds, the vehicle is competitive on the dragstrip with the Tesla Model S P100D Ludicrous. The top speed of 300 km/h (186 mph) is also impressive.

Another interesting feature is the bi-directional charging system that enables the battery pack to act as a home battery pack:

The battery can be charged rapidly with up to 100 kilowatts DC and even enables an intelligent energy management in combination with a photovoltaic installation, for instance on a single-family house: by means of bi-directional charging the sports car can even be used as a home storage and temporarily stores regenerative energy to dispense it back to the house, if required.

It’s particularly useful because the vehicle is clearly not a daily driver and therefore, it’s likely to sit in a garage often.

Kreisel is showcasing the converted vehicle at the TECHNO-CLASSICA in Essen. Here’s their brochure: